The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sense and Sensibility, by Jane Austen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Sense and Sensibility

Author: Jane Austen

Commentator: Austin Dobson

Illustrator: Hugh Thomson

Release Date: June 15, 2007 [EBook #21839]
Last updated: January 18, 2009

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SENSE AND SENSIBILITY ***




Produced by Fritz Ohrenschall and Sankar Viswanathan (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









                         Transcriber's Note:

The Table of Contents is not part of the original book. The illustration
on page 290 is missing from the book. The Introduction ends abruptly.
Seems incomplete.


       [Illustration: _Mr. Dashwood introduced him._--P. 219.]



                         SENSE & SENSIBILITY



                                  BY

                             JANE AUSTEN



                         WITH AN INTRODUCTION


                                  BY

                            AUSTIN DOBSON



                             ILLUSTRATED


                                  BY

                             HUGH THOMSON






                  LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED

                   NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

                                 1902



        _First Edition with Hugh Thomson's Illustrations_ 1896

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
CHAPTER I
CHAPTER II
CHAPTER III
CHAPTER IV
CHAPTER V
CHAPTER VI
CHAPTER VII
CHAPTER VIII
CHAPTER IX
CHAPTER X
CHAPTER XI
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER XIII
CHAPTER XIV
CHAPTER XV
CHAPTER XVI
CHAPTER XVII
CHAPTER XVIII
CHAPTER XIX
CHAPTER XX
CHAPTER XXI
CHAPTER XXII
CHAPTER XXIII
CHAPTER XXIV
CHAPTER XXV
CHAPTER XXVI
CHAPTER XXVII
CHAPTER XXVIII
CHAPTER XXIX
CHAPTER XXX
CHAPTER XXXI
CHAPTER XXXII
CHAPTER XXXIII
CHAPTER XXXIV
CHAPTER XXXV
CHAPTER XXXVI
CHAPTER XXXVII
CHAPTER XXXVIII
CHAPTER XXXIX
CHAPTER XL
CHAPTER XLI
CHAPTER XLII
CHAPTER XLIII
CHAPTER XLIV
CHAPTER XLV
CHAPTER XLVI
CHAPTER XLVII
CHAPTER XLVIII
CHAPTER XLIX
CHAPTER L

       *       *       *       *       *




INTRODUCTION


With the title of _Sense and Sensibility_ is connected one of those minor
problems which delight the cummin-splitters of criticism. In the _Cecilia_
of Madame D'Arblay--the forerunner, if not the model, of Miss Austen--is a
sentence which at first sight suggests some relationship to the name of
the book which, in the present series, inaugurated Miss Austen's novels.
'The whole of this unfortunate business'--says a certain didactic Dr.
Lyster, talking in capitals, towards the end of volume three of
_Cecilia_--'has been the result of PRIDE and PREJUDICE,' and looking to
the admitted familiarity of Miss Austen with Madame D'Arblay's work, it
has been concluded that Miss Austen borrowed from _Cecilia_, the title of
her second novel. But here comes in the little problem to which we have
referred. _Pride and Prejudice_ it is true, was written and finished
before _Sense and Sensibility_--its original title for several years being
_First Impressions_. Then, in 1797, the author fell to work upon an older
essay in letters _à la_ Richardson, called _Elinor and Marianne_, which
she re-christened _Sense and Sensibility._ This, as we know, was her first
published book; and whatever may be the connection between the title of
_Pride and Prejudice_ and the passage in _Cecilia_, there is an obvious
connection between the title of _Pride and Prejudice_ and the _title of
Sense and Sensibility_. If Miss Austen re-christened _Elinor and
Marianne_ before she changed the title of _First Impressions_, as she well
may have, it is extremely unlikely that the name of _Pride and Prejudice_
has anything to do with _Cecilia_ (which, besides, had been published at
least twenty years before). Upon the whole, therefore, it is most likely
that the passage in Madame D'Arblay is a mere coincidence; and that in
_Sense and Sensibility_, as well as in the novel that succeeded it in
publication, Miss Austen, after the fashion of the old morality plays,
simply substituted the leading characteristics of her principal personages
for their names. Indeed, in _Sense and Sensibility_ the sense of Elinor,
and the sensibility (or rather _sensiblerie_) of Marianne, are markedly
emphasised in the opening pages of the book But Miss Austen subsequently,
and, as we think, wisely, discarded in her remaining efforts the cheap
attraction of an alliterative title. _Emma_ and _Persuasion, Northanger
Abbey_ and _Mansfield Park_, are names far more in consonance with the
quiet tone of her easy and unobtrusive art.

_Elinor and Marianne_ was originally written about 1792. After the
completion--or partial completion, for it was again revised in
1811--of _First Impressions_ (subsequently _Pride and Prejudice_),
Miss Austen set about recasting _Elinor and Marianne_, then composed
in the form of letters; and she had no sooner accomplished this task,
than she began _Northanger Abbey_. It would be interesting to know to
what extent she remodelled _Sense and Sensibility_ in 1797-98, for we
are told that previous to its publication in 1811 she again devoted a
considerable time to its preparation for the press, and it is clear
that this does not mean the correction of proofs alone, but also a
preliminary revision of MS. Especially would it be interesting if we
could ascertain whether any of its more finished passages, _e.g._ the
admirable conversation between the Miss Dashwoods and Willoughby in
chapter x., were the result of those fallow and apparently barren
years at Bath and Southampton, or whether they were already part of
the second version of 1797-98. But upon this matter the records are
mute. A careful examination of the correspondence published by Lord
Brabourne in 1884 only reveals two definite references to _Sense and
Sensibility_ and these are absolutely unfruitful in suggestion. In
April 1811 she speaks of having corrected two sheets of 'S and S,'
which she has scarcely a hope of getting out in the following June;
and in September, an extract from the diary of another member of the
family indirectly discloses the fact that the book had by that time
been published. This extract is a brief reference to a letter which
had been received from Cassandra Austen, begging her correspondent not
to mention that Aunt Jane wrote _Sense and Sensibility._ Beyond these
minute items of information, and the statement--already referred to in
the Introduction to _Pride and Prejudice_--that she considered herself
overpaid for the labour she had bestowed upon it, absolutely nothing
seems to have been preserved by her descendants respecting her first
printed effort. In the absence of particulars some of her critics have
fallen to speculate upon the reason which made her select it, and not
_Pride and Prejudice_, for her début; and they have, perhaps
naturally, found in the fact a fresh confirmation of that traditional
blindness of authors to their own best work, which is one of the
commonplaces of literary history. But this is to premise that she
_did_ regard it as her masterpiece, a fact which, apart from this
accident of priority of issue, is, as far as we are aware, nowhere
asserted. A simpler solution is probably that, of the three novels she
had written or sketched by 1811, _Pride and Prejudice_ was languishing
under the stigma of having been refused by one bookseller without the
formality of inspection, while _Northanger Abbey_ was lying _perdu_ in
another bookseller's drawer at Bath. In these circumstances it is
intelligible that she should turn to _Sense and Sensibility_, when, at
length--upon the occasion of a visit to her brother in London in the
spring of 1811--Mr. T. Egerton of the 'Military Library,' Whitehall,
dawned upon the horizon as a practicable publisher.

By the time _Sense and Sensibility_ left the press, Miss Austen was
again domiciled at Chawton Cottage. For those accustomed to the
swarming reviews of our day, with their Babel of notices, it may seem
strange that there should be no record of the effect produced, seeing
that, as already stated, the book sold well enough to enable its
putter-forth to hand over to its author what Mr. Gargery, in _Great
Expectations_, would have described as 'a cool £150.' Surely Mr.
Egerton, who had visited Miss Austen at Sloane Street, must have later
conveyed to her some intelligence of the way in which her work had
been welcomed by the public. But if he did, it is no longer
discoverable. Mr. Austen Leigh, her first and best biographer, could
find no account either of the publication or of the author's feelings
thereupon. As far as it is possible to judge, the critical verdicts
she obtained were mainly derived from her own relatives and intimate
friends, and some of these latter--if one may trust a little anthology
which she herself collected, and from which Mr. Austen Leigh prints
extracts--must have been more often exasperating than sympathetic. The
long chorus of intelligent approval by which she was afterwards
greeted did not begin to be really audible before her death, and her
'fit audience' during her lifetime must have been emphatically 'few,'
Of two criticisms which came out in the _Quarterly_ early in the
century, she could only have seen one, that of 1815; the other, by
Archbishop Whately, the first which treated her in earnest, did not
appear until she had been three years dead. Dr. Whately deals mainly
with _Mansfield Park_ and _Persuasion_; his predecessor professed to
review _Emma_, though he also gives brief summaries of _Sense and
Sensibility_ and _Pride and Prejudice_. Mr. Austen Leigh, we think,
speaks too contemptuously of this initial notice of 1815. If, at
certain points, it is half-hearted and inadequate, it is still fairly
accurate in its recognition of Miss Austen's supreme merit, as
contrasted with her contemporaries--to wit, her skill in investing the
fortunes of ordinary characters and the narrative of common
occurrences with all the sustained excitement of romance. The Reviewer
points out very justly that this kind of work, 'being deprived of all
that, according to Bayes, goes "to elevate and surprise," must make
amends by displaying depth of knowledge and dexterity of execution.'
And in these qualities, even with such living competitors of her own
sex as Miss Edgeworth and Miss Brunton (whose _Self-control_ came out
in the same year as _Sense and Sensibility_), he does not scruple to
declare that 'Miss Austen stands almost alone.' If he omits to lay
stress upon her judgment, her nice sense of fitness, her restraint,
her fine irony, and the delicacy of her artistic touch, something must
be allowed for the hesitations and reservations which invariably beset
the critical pioneer.

To contend, however, for a moment that the present volume is Miss
Austen's greatest, as it was her first published, novel, would be a
mere exercise in paradox. There are, who swear by _Persuasion_; there
are, who prefer _Emma_ and _Mansfield Park_; there is a large
contingent for _Pride and Prejudice_; and there is even a section
which advocates the pre-eminence of _Northanger Abbey_. But no one, as
far as we can remember, has ever put _Sense and Sensibility_ first,
nor can we believe that its author did so herself. And yet it is she
herself who has furnished the standard by which we judge it, and it is
by comparison with _Pride and Prejudice_, in which the leading
characters are also two sisters, that we assess and depress its merit.
The Elinor and Marianne of _Sense and Sensibility_ are only inferior
when they are contrasted with the Elizabeth and Jane of _Pride and
Prejudice_; and even then, it is probably because we personally like
the handsome and amiable Jane Bennet rather better than the obsolete
survival of the sentimental novel represented by Marianne Dashwood.
Darcy and Bingley again are much more 'likeable' (to use Lady
Queensberry's word) than the colourless Edward Ferrars and the
stiff-jointed Colonel Brandon. Yet it might not unfairly be contended
that there is more fidelity to what Mr. Thomas Hardy has termed
'life's little ironies' in Miss Austen's disposal of the two Miss
Dashwoods than there is in her disposal of the heroines of _Pride and
Prejudice_. Every one does not get a Bingley, or a Darcy (with a
park); but a good many sensible girls like Elinor pair off contentedly
with poor creatures like Edward Ferrars, while not a few enthusiasts
like Marianne decline at last upon middle-aged colonels with flannel
waistcoats. George Eliot, we fancy, would have held that the fates of
Elinor and Marianne were more probable than the fortunes of Jane and
Eliza Bennet. That, of the remaining characters, there is certainly
none to rival Mr. Bennet, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, or the
ineffable Mr. Collins, of _Pride and Prejudice_, is true; but we
confess to a kindness for vulgar matchmaking Mrs. Jennings with her
still-room 'parmaceti for an inward bruise' in the shape of a glass of
old Constantia; and for the diluted Squire Western, Sir John
Middleton, whose horror of being alone carries him to the point of
rejoicing in the acquisition of _two_ to the population of London.
Excellent again are Mr. Palmer and his wife; excellent, in their
sordid veracity, the self-seeking figures of the Miss Steeles. But the
pearls of the book must be allowed to be that egregious amateur in
toothpick-cases, Mr. Robert Ferrars (with his excursus in chapter
xxxvi. on life in a cottage), and the admirably-matched Mr. and Mrs.
John Dashwood. Miss Austen herself has never done anything better than
the inimitable and oft-quoted chapter wherein is debated between the
last-named pair the momentous matter of the amount to be devoted to
Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters; while the suggestion in chapters
xxxiii. and xxxiv. that the owner of Norland was once within some
thousands of having to sell out at a loss, deserves to be remembered
with that other memorable escape of Sir Roger de Coverley's ancestor,
who was only not killed in the civil wars because 'he was sent out of
the field upon a private message, the day before the battle of
Worcester.'

Of local colouring there is as little in _Sense and Sensibility_ as in
_Pride and Prejudice_. It is not unlikely that some memories of
Steventon may survive in Norland; and it may be noted that there is
actually a Barton Place to the north of Exeter, not far from Lord
Iddesleigh's well-known seat of Upton Pynes. It is scarcely possible,
also, not to believe that, in Mrs. Jennings's description of
Delaford--'a nice place, I can tell you; exactly what I call a nice
old-fashioned place, full of comforts and conveniences; quite shut in
with great garden walls that are covered with the best fruit-trees in
the country; and such a mulberry tree in one corner!'--Miss Austen had
in mind some real Hampshire or Devonshire country house. In any case,
it comes nearer a picture than what we usually get from her pen. 'Then
there is a dovecote, some delightful stew-ponds, and a very pretty
canal; and everything, in short, that one could wish for; and,
moreover, it is close to the church, and only a quarter of a mile
from the turnpike-road, so 'tis never dull, for if you only go and sit
up in an old yew arbour behind the house, you may see all the
carriages that pass along.' The last lines suggest those quaint
'gazebos' and alcoves, which, in the coaching days, were so often to
be found perched at the roadside, where one might sit and watch the
Dover or Canterbury stage go whirling by. Of genteel accomplishments
there is a touch In the 'landscape in coloured silks' which Charlotte
Palmer had worked at school (chap, xxvi.); and of old remedies for the
lost art of swooning, in the 'lavender drops' of chapter xxix. The
mention of a dance as a 'little hop' in chapter ix. reads like a
premature instance of middle Victorian slang. But nothing is new--even
in a novel--and 'hop,' in this sense, is at least as old as _Joseph
Andrews_.

       *       *       *       *       *




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


Mr. Dashwood introduced him             _Frontispiece_

His son's son, a child of four years old

"I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it"

So shy before company

They sang together

He cut off a long lock of her hair

"I have found you out in spite of all your tricks"

Apparently In violent affliction

Begging her to stop

Came to take a survey of the guest

"I declare they are quite charming"

Mischievous tricks

Drinking to her best affections

Amiably bashful

"I can answer for it," said Mrs. Jennings

At that moment she first perceived him

"How fond he was of it!"

Offered him one of Folly's puppies

A very smart beau

Introduced to Mrs. Jennings

Mrs. Jennings assured him directly that she should not stand
upon ceremony

Mrs. Ferrars

Drawing him a little aside

In a whisper

"You have heard, I suppose"

Talking over the business

"She put in the feather last night"

Listening at the door

Both gained considerable amusement

"Of one thing I may assure you"

Showing her child to the housekeeper

The gardener's lamentations

Opened a window-shutter

"I entreat you to stay"

"I was formally dismissed"

"I have entered many a shop to avoid your sight"

"And see how the children go on"

"I suppose you know, ma'am, that Mr. Ferrars is married"

It _was_ Edward

"Everything in such respectable condition"

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I


The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex. Their estate
was large, and their residence was at Norland Park, in the centre of
their property, where, for many generations, they had lived in so
respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their
surrounding acquaintance. The late owner of this estate was a single
man, who lived to a very advanced age, and who for many years of his
life, had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister. But her
death, which happened ten years before his own, produced a great
alteration in his home; for to supply her loss, he invited and
received into his house the family of his nephew Mr. Henry Dashwood,
the legal inheritor of the Norland estate, and the person to whom he
intended to bequeath it. In the society of his nephew and niece, and
their children, the old Gentleman's days were comfortably spent. His
attachment to them all increased. The constant attention of Mr. and
Mrs. Henry Dashwood to his wishes, which proceeded not merely from
interest, but from goodness of heart, gave him every degree of solid
comfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of the
children added a relish to his existence.

By a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had one son: by his present
lady, three daughters. The son, a steady respectable young man, was
amply provided for by the fortune of his mother, which had been large,
and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age. By his own
marriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards, he added to his
wealth. To him therefore the succession to the Norland estate was not
so really important as to his sisters; for their fortune, independent
of what might arise to them from their father's inheriting that
property, could be but small. Their mother had nothing, and their
father only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal; for the
remaining moiety of his first wife's fortune was also secured to her
child, and he had only a life-interest in it.

The old gentleman died: his will was read, and like almost every
other will, gave as much disappointment as pleasure. He was neither so
unjust, nor so ungrateful, as to leave his estate from his nephew; but
he left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of the
bequest. Mr. Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his wife
and daughters than for himself or his son; but to his son, and his
son's son, a child of four years old, it was secured, in such a way,
as to leave to himself no power of providing for those who were most
dear to him, and who most needed a provision by any charge on the
estate, or by any sale of its valuable woods. The whole was tied up
for the benefit of this child, who, in occasional visits with his
father and mother at Norland, had so far gained on the affections of
his uncle, by such attractions as are by no means unusual in children
of two or three years old; an imperfect articulation, an earnest
desire of having his own way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of
noise, as to outweigh all the value of all the attention which, for
years, he had received from his niece and her daughters. He meant not
to be unkind, however, and, as a mark of his affection for the three
girls, he left them a thousand pounds a-piece.

Mr. Dashwood's disappointment was, at first, severe; but his temper
was cheerful and sanguine; and he might reasonably hope to live many
years, and by living economically, lay by a considerable sum from the
produce of an estate already large, and capable of almost immediate
improvement. But the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, was
his only one twelvemonth. He survived his uncle no longer; and ten
thousand pounds, including the late legacies, was all that remained
for his widow and daughters.

His son was sent for as soon as his danger was known, and to him Mr.
Dashwood recommended, with all the strength and urgency which illness
could command, the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters.

Mr. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of the
family; but he was affected by a recommendation of such a nature at
such a time, and he promised to do every thing in his power to make
them comfortable. His father was rendered easy by such an assurance,
and Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there
might prudently be in his power to do for them.

[Illustration: _His son's son, a child of four years old._]

He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to be rather cold hearted
and rather selfish is to be ill-disposed: but he was, in general, well
respected; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge of
his ordinary duties. Had he married a more amiable woman, he might
have been made still more respectable than he was: he might even have
been made amiable himself; for he was very young when he married, and
very fond of his wife. But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricature
of himself; more narrow-minded and selfish.

When he gave his promise to his father, he meditated within himself to
increase the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousand
pounds a-piece. He then really thought himself equal to it. The
prospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,
besides the remaining half of his own mother's fortune, warmed his
heart, and made him feel capable of generosity. "Yes, he would give
them three thousand pounds: it would be liberal and handsome! It would
be enough to make them completely easy. Three thousand pounds! he
could spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience." He
thought of it all day long, and for many days successively, and he did
not repent.

No sooner was his father's funeral over, than Mrs. John Dashwood,
without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law,
arrived with her child and their attendants. No one could dispute her
right to come; the house was her husband's from the moment of his
father's decease; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the
greater, and to a woman in Mrs. Dashwood's situation, with only common
feelings, must have been highly unpleasing. But in _her_ mind there
was a sense of honor so keen, a generosity so romantic, that any
offence of the kind, by whomsoever given or received, was to her a
source of immovable disgust. Mrs. John Dashwood had never been a
favourite with any of her husband's family; but she had had no
opportunity, till the present, of showing them with how little
attention to the comfort of other people she could act when occasion
required it.

So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour, and so
earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it, that, on the
arrival of the latter, she would have quitted the house for ever, had
not the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on
the propriety of going, and her own tender love for all her three
children determined her afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid
a breach with their brother.

Elinor, this eldest daughter, whose advice was so effectual, possessed
a strength of understanding, and coolness of judgment, which qualified
her, though only nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother, and
enabled her frequently to counteract, to the advantage of them all,
that eagerness of mind in Mrs. Dashwood which must generally have led
to imprudence. She had an excellent heart; her disposition was
affectionate, and her feelings were strong; but she knew how to govern
them: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn; and which
one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught.

Marianne's abilities were, in many respects, quite equal to Elinor's.
She was sensible and clever; but eager in everything: her sorrows, her
joys, could have no moderation. She was generous, amiable,
interesting: she was everything but prudent. The resemblance between
her and her mother was strikingly great.

Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister's sensibility; but
by Mrs. Dashwood it was valued and cherished. They encouraged each
other now in the violence of their affliction. The agony of grief
which overpowered them at first, was voluntarily renewed, was sought
for, was created again and again. They gave themselves up wholly to
their sorrow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection
that could afford it, and resolved against ever admitting consolation
in future. Elinor, too, was deeply afflicted; but still she could
struggle, she could exert herself. She could consult with her brother,
could receive her sister-in-law on her arrival, and treat her with
proper attention; and could strive to rouse her mother to similar
exertion, and encourage her to similar forbearance.

Margaret, the other sister, was a good-humored, well-disposed girl;
but as she had already imbibed a good deal of Marianne's romance,
without having much of her sense, she did not, at thirteen, bid fair
to equal her sisters at a more advanced period of life.




CHAPTER II


Mrs. John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of Norland; and her
mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors.
As such, however, they were treated by her with quiet civility; and by
her husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody
beyond himself, his wife, and their child. He really pressed them,
with some earnestness, to consider Norland as their home; and, as no
plan appeared so eligible to Mrs. Dashwood as remaining there till she
could accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood, his
invitation was accepted.

A continuance in a place where everything reminded her of former
delight, was exactly what suited her mind. In seasons of cheerfulness,
no temper could be more cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greater
degree, that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happiness
itself. But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,
and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy.

Mrs. John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her husband intended
to do for his sisters. To take three thousand pounds from the fortune
of their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the most
dreadful degree. She begged him to think again on the subject. How
could he answer it to himself to rob his child, and his only child
too, of so large a sum? And what possible claim could the Miss
Dashwoods, who were related to him only by half blood, which she
considered as no relationship at all, have on his generosity to so
large an amount. It was very well known that no affection was ever
supposed to exist between the children of any man by different
marriages; and why was he to ruin himself, and their poor little
Harry, by giving away all his money to his half sisters?

"It was my father's last request to me," replied her husband, "that I
should assist his widow and daughters."

"He did not know what he was talking of, I dare say; ten to one but he
was light-headed at the time. Had he been in his right senses, he
could not have thought of such a thing as begging you to give away
half your fortune from your own child."

"He did not stipulate for any particular sum, my dear Fanny; he only
requested me, in general terms, to assist them, and make their
situation more comfortable than it was in his power to do. Perhaps it
would have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself. He could
hardly suppose I should neglect them. But as he required the promise,
I could not do less than give it; at least I thought so at the time.
The promise, therefore, was given, and must be performed. Something
must be done for them whenever they leave Norland and settle in a new
home."

"Well, then, _let_ something be done for them; but _that_ something
need not be three thousand pounds. Consider," she added, "that when
the money is once parted with, it never can return. Your sisters will
marry, and it will be gone for ever. If, indeed, it could be restored
to our poor little boy--"

"Why, to be sure," said her husband, very gravely, "that would make
great difference. The time may come when Harry will regret that so
large a sum was parted with. If he should have a numerous family, for
instance, it would be a very convenient addition."

"To be sure it would."

"Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties, if the sum were
diminished one half. Five hundred pounds would be a prodigious
increase to their fortunes!"

"Oh! beyond anything great! What brother on earth would do half so
much for his sisters, even if _really_ his sisters! And as it is--only
half blood! But you have such a generous spirit!"

"I would not wish to do any thing mean," he replied. "One had rather,
on such occasions, do too much than too little. No one, at least, can
think I have not done enough for them: even themselves, they can
hardly expect more."

"There is no knowing what _they_ may expect," said the lady, "but we
are not to think of their expectations: the question is, what you can
afford to do."

"Certainly; and I think I may afford to give them five hundred pounds
a-piece. As it is, without any addition of mine, they will each have
about three thousand pounds on their mother's death--a very
comfortable fortune for any young woman."

"To be sure it is; and, indeed, it strikes me that they can want no
addition at all. They will have ten thousand pounds divided amongst
them. If they marry, they will be sure of doing well, and if they do
not, they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of
ten thousand pounds."

"That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know whether, upon the
whole, it would not be more advisable to do something for their mother
while she lives, rather than for them--something of the annuity kind I
mean. My sisters would feel the good effects of it as well as herself.
A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable."

His wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her consent to this
plan.

"To be sure," said she, "it is better than parting with fifteen
hundred pounds at once. But, then, if Mrs. Dashwood should live
fifteen years we shall be completely taken in."

"Fifteen years! my dear Fanny; her life cannot be worth half that
purchase."

"Certainly not; but if you observe, people always live for ever when
there is an annuity to be paid them; and she is very stout and
healthy, and hardly forty. An annuity is a very serious business; it
comes over and over every year, and there is no getting rid of it. You
are not aware of what you are doing. I have known a great deal of the
trouble of annuities; for my mother was clogged with the payment of
three to old superannuated servants by my father's will, and it is
amazing how disagreeable she found it. Twice every year these
annuities were to be paid; and then there was the trouble of getting
it to them; and then one of them was said to have died, and afterwards
it turned out to be no such thing. My mother was quite sick of it. Her
income was not her own, she said, with such perpetual claims on it;
and it was the more unkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money
would have been entirely at my mother's disposal, without any
restriction whatever. It has given me such an abhorrence of annuities,
that I am sure I would not pin myself down to the payment of one for
all the world."

"It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr. Dashwood, "to have
those kind of yearly drains on one's income. One's fortune, as your
mother justly says, is _not_ one's own. To be tied down to the regular
payment of such a sum, on every rent day, is by no means desirable: it
takes away one's independence."

"Undoubtedly; and after all you have no thanks for it. They think
themselves secure, you do no more than what is expected, and it raises
no gratitude at all. If I were you, whatever I did should be done at
my own discretion entirely. I would not bind myself to allow them any
thing yearly. It may be very inconvenient some years to spare a
hundred, or even fifty pounds from our own expenses."

"I believe you are right, my love; it will be better that there should
be no annuity in the case; whatever I may give them occasionally will
be of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance, because they
would only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a larger
income, and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the
year. It will certainly be much the best way. A present of fifty
pounds, now and then, will prevent their ever being distressed for
money, and will, I think, be amply discharging my promise to my
father."

"To be sure it will. Indeed, to say the truth, I am convinced within
myself that your father had no idea of your giving them any money at
all. The assistance he thought of, I dare say, was only such as might
be reasonably expected of you; for instance, such as looking out for a
comfortable small house for them, helping them to move their things,
and sending them presents of fish and game, and so forth, whenever
they are in season. I'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther;
indeed, it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did. Do but
consider, my dear Mr. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your
mother-in-law and her daughters may live on the interest of seven
thousand pounds, besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the
girls, which brings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece, and, of
course, they will pay their mother for their board out of it.
Altogether, they will have five hundred a-year amongst them, and what
on earth can four women want for more than that?--They will live so
cheap! Their housekeeping will be nothing at all. They will have no
carriage, no horses, and hardly any servants; they will keep no
company, and can have no expenses of any kind! Only conceive how
comfortable they will be! Five hundred a year! I am sure I cannot
imagine how they will spend half of it; and as to your giving them
more, it is quite absurd to think of it. They will be much more able
to give _you_ something."

"Upon my word," said Mr. Dashwood, "I believe you are perfectly right.
My father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me than
what you say. I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulfil
my engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as you
have described. When my mother removes into another house my services
shall be readily given to accommodate her as far as I can. Some little
present of furniture too may be acceptable then."

"Certainly," returned Mrs. John Dashwood. "But, however, _one_ thing
must be considered. When your father and mother moved to Norland,
though the furniture of Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, and
linen was saved, and is now left to your mother. Her house will
therefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it."

"That is a material consideration undoubtedly. A valuable legacy
indeed! And yet some of the plate would have been a very pleasant
addition to our own stock here."

"Yes; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as what
belongs to this house. A great deal too handsome, in my opinion, for
any place _they_ can ever afford to live in. But, however, so it is.
Your father thought only of _them_ And I must say this: that you owe
no particular gratitude to him, nor attention to his wishes; for we
very well know that if he could, he would have left almost everything
in the world to _them._"

This argument was irresistible. It gave to his intentions whatever of
decision was wanting before; and he finally resolved, that it would be
absolutely unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more for the
widow and children of his father, than such kind of neighbourly acts
as his own wife pointed out.




CHAPTER III


Mrs. Dashwood remained at Norland several months; not from any
disinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceased
to raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while; for when
her spirits began to revive, and her mind became capable of some other
exertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholy
remembrances, she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in her
inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland; for
to remove far from that beloved spot was impossible. But she could
hear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort and
ease, and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter, whose steadier
judgment rejected several houses as too large for their income, which
her mother would have approved.

[Illustration: "_I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it._"]

Mrs. Dashwood had been informed by her husband of the solemn promise
on the part of his son in their favour, which gave comfort to his last
earthly reflections. She doubted the sincerity of this assurance no
more than he had doubted it himself, and she thought of it for her
daughters' sake with satisfaction, though as for herself she was
persuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000L would support her
in affluence. For their brother's sake, too, for the sake of his own
heart, she rejoiced; and she reproached herself for being unjust to
his merit before, in believing him incapable of generosity. His
attentive behaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that
their welfare was dear to him, and, for a long time, she firmly relied
on the liberality of his intentions.

The contempt which she had, very early in their acquaintance, felt for
her daughter-in-law, was very much increased by the farther knowledge
of her character, which half a year's residence in her family
afforded; and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or
maternal affection on the side of the former, the two ladies might
have found it impossible to have lived together so long, had not a
particular circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility,
according to the opinions of Mrs. Dashwood, to her daughters'
continuance at Norland.

This circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl and
the brother of Mrs. John Dashwood, a gentlemanlike and pleasing young
man, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister's
establishment at Norland, and who had since spent the greatest part of
his time there.

Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of
interest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died
very rich; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence,
for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depended on the
will of his mother. But Mrs. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either
consideration. It was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable,
that he loved her daughter, and that Elinor returned the partiality.
It was contrary to every doctrine of her's that difference of fortune
should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of
disposition; and that Elinor's merit should not be acknowledged by
every one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.

Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by any
peculiar graces of person or address. He was not handsome, and his
manners required intimacy to make them pleasing. He was too diffident
to do justice to himself; but when his natural shyness was overcome,
his behaviour gave every indication of an open, affectionate heart.
His understanding was good, and his education had given it solid
improvement. But he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition to
answer the wishes of his mother and sister, who longed to see him
distinguished as--they hardly knew what. They wanted him to make a
fine figure in the world in some manner or other. His mother wished to
interest him in political concerns, to get him into parliament, or to
see him connected with some of the great men of the day. Mrs. John
Dashwood wished it likewise; but in the mean while, till one of these
superior blessings could be attained, it would have quieted her
ambition to see him driving a barouche. But Edward had no turn for
great men or barouches. All his wishes centered in domestic comfort
and the quiet of private life. Fortunately he had a younger brother
who was more promising.

Edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engaged
much of Mrs. Dashwood's attention; for she was, at that time, in such
affliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects. She saw
only that he was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it. He
did not disturb the wretchedness of her mind by ill-timed
conversation. She was first called to observe and approve him farther,
by a reflection which Elinor chanced one day to make on the
difference between him and his sister. It was a contrast which
recommended him most forcibly to her mother.

"It is enough," said she; "to say that he is unlike Fanny is enough.
It implies everything amiable. I love him already."

"I think you will like him," said Elinor, "when you know more of him."

"Like him!" replied her mother with a smile. "I feel no sentiment of
approbation inferior to love."

"You may esteem him."

"I have never yet known what it was to separate esteem and love."

Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him. Her manners
were attaching, and soon banished his reserve. She speedily
comprehended all his merits; the persuasion of his regard for Elinor
perhaps assisted her penetration; but she really felt assured of his
worth: and even that quietness of manner, which militated against all
her established ideas of what a young man's address ought to be, was
no longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his
temper affectionate.

No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour to
Elinor, than she considered their serious attachment as certain, and
looked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching.

"In a few months, my dear Marianne," said she, "Elinor will, in all
probability be settled for life. We shall miss her; but _she_ will be
happy."

"Oh! Mamma, how shall we do without her?"

"My love, it will be scarcely a separation. We shall live within a few
miles of each other, and shall meet every day of our lives. You will
gain a brother--a real, affectionate brother. I have the highest
opinion in the world of Edward's heart. But you look grave, Marianne;
do you disapprove your sister's choice?"

"Perhaps," said Marianne, "I may consider it with some surprise.
Edward is very amiable, and I love him tenderly. But yet--he is not
the kind of young man; there is something wanting--his figure is not
striking; it has none of that grace which I should expect in the man
who could seriously attach my sister. His eyes want all that spirit,
that fire, which at once announce virtue and intelligence. And besides
all this, I am afraid, Mamma, he has no real taste. Music seems
scarcely to attract him, and though he admires Elinor's drawings very
much, it is not the admiration of a person who can understand their
worth. It is evident, in spite of his frequent attention to her while
she draws, that in fact he knows nothing of the matter. He admires as
a lover, not as a connoisseur. To satisfy me, those characters must be
united. I could not be happy with a man whose taste did not in every
point coincide with my own. He must enter into all my feelings; the
same books, the same music must charm us both. Oh! mama, how
spiritless, how tame was Edward's manner in reading to us last night!
I felt for my sister most severely. Yet she bore it with so much
composure, she seemed scarcely to notice it. I could hardly keep my
seat. To hear those beautiful lines which have frequently almost
driven me wild, pronounced with such impenetrable calmness, such
dreadful indifference!"

"He would certainly have done more justice to simple and elegant
prose. I thought so at the time; but you _would_ give him Cowper."

"Nay, Mamma, if he is not to be animated by Cowper!--but we must allow
for difference of taste. Elinor has not my feelings, and therefore she
may overlook it, and be happy with him. But it would have broke _my_
heart, had I loved him, to hear him read with so little sensibility.
Mama, the more I know of the world, the more am I convinced that I
shall never see a man whom I can really love. I require so much! He
must have all Edward's virtues, and his person and manners must
ornament his goodness with every possible charm."

"Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen. It is yet too early in
life to despair of such a happiness. Why should you be less fortunate
than your mother? In one circumstance only, my Marianne, may your
destiny be different from her's!"




CHAPTER IV


"What a pity it is, Elinor," said Marianne, "that Edward should have
no taste for drawing."

"No taste for drawing!" replied Elinor, "why should you think so? He
does not draw himself, indeed, but he has great pleasure in seeing the
performances of other people, and I assure you he is by no means
deficient in natural taste, though he has not had opportunities of
improving it. Had he ever been in the way of learning, I think he
would have drawn very well. He distrusts his own judgment in such
matters so much, that he is always unwilling to give his opinion on
any picture; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste,
which in general direct him perfectly right."

Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no more on the subject; but
the kind of approbation which Elinor described as excited in him by
the drawings of other people, was very far from that rapturous
delight, which, in her opinion, could alone be called taste. Yet,
though smiling within herself at the mistake, she honoured her sister
for that blind partiality to Edward which produced it.

"I hope, Marianne," continued Elinor, "you do not consider him as
deficient in general taste. Indeed, I think I may say that you cannot,
for your behaviour to him is perfectly cordial, and if _that_ were
your opinion, I am sure you could never be civil to him."

Marianne hardly knew what to say. She would not wound the feelings of
her sister on any account, and yet to say what she did not believe was
impossible. At length she replied:

"Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of him is not in every thing
equal to your sense of his merits. I have not had so many
opportunities of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind, his
inclinations and tastes, as you have; but I have the highest opinion
in the world of his goodness and sense. I think him every thing that
is worthy and amiable."

"I am sure," replied Elinor, with a smile, "that his dearest friends
could not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that. I do not
perceive how you could express yourself more warmly."

Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased.

"Of his sense and his goodness," continued Elinor, "no one can, I
think, be in doubt, who has seen him often enough to engage him in
unreserved conversation. The excellence of his understanding and his
principles can be concealed only by that shyness which too often keeps
him silent. You know enough of him to do justice to his solid worth.
But of his minuter propensities, as you call them you have from
peculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself. He and I
have been at times thrown a good deal together, while you have been
wholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother. I
have seen a great deal of him, have studied his sentiments and heard
his opinion on subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole,
I venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed, enjoyment of
books exceedingly great, his imagination lively, his observation just
and correct, and his taste delicate and pure. His abilities in every
respect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person.
At first sight, his address is certainly not striking; and his person
can hardly be called handsome, till the expression of his eyes, which
are uncommonly good, and the general sweetness of his countenance, is
perceived. At present, I know him so well, that I think him really
handsome; or at least, almost so. What say you, Marianne?"

"I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I do not now. When
you tell me to love him as a brother, I shall no more see imperfection
in his face, than I now do in his heart."

Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for the warmth she
had been betrayed into, in speaking of him. She felt that Edward stood
very high in her opinion. She believed the regard to be mutual; but
she required greater certainty of it to make Marianne's conviction of
their attachment agreeable to her. She knew that what Marianne and her
mother conjectured one moment, they believed the next--that with them,
to wish was to hope, and to hope was to expect. She tried to explain
the real state of the case to her sister.

"I do not attempt to deny," said she, "that I think very highly of
him--that I greatly esteem, that I like him."

Marianne here burst forth with indignation--

"Esteem him! Like him! Cold-hearted Elinor! Oh! worse than
cold-hearted! Ashamed of being otherwise. Use those words again, and I
will leave the room this moment."

Elinor could not help laughing. "Excuse me," said she; "and be assured
that I meant no offence to you, by speaking, in so quiet a way, of my
own feelings. Believe them to be stronger than I have declared;
believe them, in short, to be such as his merit, and the
suspicion--the hope--of his affection for me may warrant, without
imprudence or folly. But farther than this you must not believe. I am
by no means assured of his regard for me. There are moments when the
extent of it seems doubtful; and till his sentiments are fully known,
you cannot wonder at my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own
partiality, by believing or calling it more than it is. In my heart I
feel little--scarcely any doubt of his preference. But there are other
points to be considered besides his inclination. He is very far from
being independent. What his mother really is we cannot know; but, from
Fanny's occasional mention of her conduct and opinions, we have never
been disposed to think her amiable; and I am very much mistaken if
Edward is not himself aware that there would be many difficulties in
his way, if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a
great fortune or high rank."

Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination of her mother
and herself had outstripped the truth.

"And you really are not engaged to him!" said she. "Yet it certainly
soon will happen. But two advantages will proceed from this delay. I
shall not lose you so soon, and Edward will have greater opportunity
of improving that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must
be so indispensably necessary to your future felicity. Oh! if he
should be so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to draw
himself, how delightful it would be!"

Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister. She could not
consider her partiality for Edward in so prosperous a state as
Marianne had believed it. There was, at times, a want of spirits about
him which, if it did not denote indifference, spoke of something
almost as unpromising. A doubt of her regard, supposing him to feel
it, need not give him more than inquietude. It would not be likely to
produce that dejection of mind which frequently attended him. A more
reasonable cause might be found in the dependent situation which
forbade the indulgence of his affection. She knew that his mother
neither behaved to him so as to make his home comfortable at present,
nor to give him any assurance that he might form a home for himself,
without strictly attending to her views for his aggrandizement. With
such a knowledge as this, it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on
the subject. She was far from depending on that result of his
preference of her, which her mother and sister still considered as
certain. Nay, the longer they were together the more doubtful seemed
the nature of his regard; and sometimes, for a few painful minutes,
she believed it to be no more than friendship.

But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough, when
perceived by his sister, to make her uneasy, and at the same time,
(which was still more common,) to make her uncivil. She took the first
opportunity of affronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking
to her so expressively of her brother's great expectations, of Mrs.
Ferrars's resolution that both her sons should marry well, and of the
danger attending any young woman who attempted to _draw him in_, that
Mrs. Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor to
be calm. She gave her an answer which marked her contempt, and
instantly left the room, resolving that, whatever might be the
inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal, her beloved Elinor
should not be exposed another week to such insinuations.

In this state of her spirits, a letter was delivered to her from the
post, which contained a proposal particularly well timed. It was the
offer of a small house, on very easy terms, belonging to a relation of
her own, a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire. The
letter was from this gentleman himself, and written in the true spirit
of friendly accommodation. He understood that she was in need of a
dwelling; and though the house he now offered her was merely a
cottage, he assured her that everything should be done to it which she
might think necessary, if the situation pleased her. He earnestly
pressed her, after giving the particulars of the house and garden, to
come with her daughters to Barton Park, the place of his own
residence, from whence she might judge, herself, whether Barton
Cottage, for the houses were in the same parish, could, by any
alteration, be made comfortable to her. He seemed really anxious to
accommodate them and the whole of his letter was written in so
friendly a style as could not fail of giving pleasure to his cousin;
more especially at a moment when she was suffering under the cold and
unfeeling behaviour of her nearer connections. She needed no time for
deliberation or inquiry. Her resolution was formed as she read. The
situation of Barton, in a county so far distant from Sussex as
Devonshire, which, but a few hours before, would have been a
sufficient objection to outweigh every possible advantage belonging to
the place, was now its first recommendation. To quit the neighbourhood
of Norland was no longer an evil; it was an object of desire; it was a
blessing, in comparison of the misery of continuing her
daughter-in-law's guest; and to remove for ever from that beloved
place would be less painful than to inhabit or visit it while such a
woman was its mistress. She instantly wrote Sir John Middleton her
acknowledgment of his kindness, and her acceptance of his proposal;
and then hastened to show both letters to her daughters, that she
might be secure of their approbation before her answer were sent.

Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent for them to settle
at some distance from Norland, than immediately amongst their present
acquaintance. On _that_ head, therefore, it was not for her to oppose
her mother's intention of removing into Devonshire. The house, too, as
described by Sir John, was on so simple a scale, and the rent so
uncommonly moderate, as to leave her no right of objection on either
point; and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any
charm to her fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of
Norland beyond her wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother
from sending a letter of acquiescence.




CHAPTER V


No sooner was her answer dispatched, than Mrs. Dashwood indulged
herself in the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife
that she was provided with a house, and should incommode them no
longer than till every thing were ready for her inhabiting it. They
heard her with surprise. Mrs. John Dashwood said nothing; but her
husband civilly hoped that she would not be settled far from Norland.
She had great satisfaction in replying that she was going into
Devonshire. Edward turned hastily towards her, on hearing this, and,
in a voice of surprise and concern, which required no explanation to
her, repeated, "Devonshire! Are you, indeed, going there? So far from
hence! And to what part of it?" She explained the situation. It was
within four miles northward of Exeter.

"It is but a cottage," she continued, "but I hope to see many of my
friends in it. A room or two can easily be added; and if my friends
find no difficulty in travelling so far to see me, I am sure I will
find none in accommodating them."

She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr. and Mrs. John
Dashwood to visit her at Barton; and to Edward she gave one with still
greater affection. Though her late conversation with her
daughter-in-law had made her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer
than was unavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effect on her
in that point to which it principally tended. To separate Edward and
Elinor was as far from being her object as ever; and she wished to
show Mrs. John Dashwood, by this pointed invitation to her brother,
how totally she disregarded her disapprobation of the match.

Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly
sorry he was that she had taken a house at such a distance from
Norland as to prevent his being of any service to her in removing her
furniture. He really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for
the very exertion to which he had limited the performance of his
promise to his father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.
The furniture was all sent around by water. It chiefly consisted of
household linen, plate, china, and books, with a handsome pianoforte
of Marianne's. Mrs. John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh:
she could not help feeling it hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's income
would be so trifling in comparison with their own, she should have any
handsome article of furniture.

Mrs. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it was ready
furnished, and she might have immediate possession. No difficulty
arose on either side in the agreement; and she waited only for the
disposal of her effects at Norland, and to determine her future
household, before she set off for the west; and this, as she was
exceedingly rapid in the performance of everything that interested
her, was soon done. The horses which were left her by her husband had
been sold soon after his death, and an opportunity now offering of
disposing of her carriage, she agreed to sell that likewise at the
earnest advice of her eldest daughter. For the comfort of her
children, had she consulted only her own wishes, she would have kept
it; but the discretion of Elinor prevailed. _Her_ wisdom too limited
the number of their servants to three; two maids and a man, with whom
they were speedily provided from amongst those who had formed their
establishment at Norland.

The man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into
Devonshire, to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival; for as
Lady Middleton was entirely unknown to Mrs. Dashwood, she preferred
going directly to the cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park; and
she relied so undoubtingly on Sir John's description of the house, as
to feel no curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as her
own. Her eagerness to be gone from Norland was preserved from
diminution by the evident satisfaction of her daughter-in-law in the
prospect of her removal; a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted
to be concealed under a cold invitation to her to defer her departure.
Now was the time when her son-in-law's promise to his father might
with particular propriety be fulfilled. Since he had neglected to do
it on first coming to the estate, their quitting his house might be
looked on as the most suitable period for its accomplishment. But Mrs.
Dashwood began shortly to give over every hope of the kind, and to be
convinced, from the general drift of his discourse, that his
assistance extended no farther than their maintenance for six months
at Norland. He so frequently talked of the increasing expenses of
housekeeping, and of the perpetual demands upon his purse, which a man
of any consequence in the world was beyond calculation exposed to,
that he seemed rather to stand in need of more money himself than to
have any design of giving money away.

In a very few weeks from the day which brought Sir John Middleton's
first letter to Norland, every thing was so far settled in their
future abode as to enable Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters to begin
their journey.

Many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place so
much beloved. "Dear, dear Norland!" said Marianne, as she wandered
alone before the house, on the last evening of their being there;
"when shall I cease to regret you!--when learn to feel a home
elsewhere! Oh! happy house, could you know what I suffer in now
viewing you from this spot, from whence perhaps I may view you no
more! And you, ye well-known trees!--but you will continue the same.
No leaf will decay because we are removed, nor any branch become
motionless although we can observe you no longer! No; you will
continue the same; unconscious of the pleasure or the regret you
occasion, and insensible of any change in those who walk under your
shade! But who will remain to enjoy you?"




CHAPTER VI


The first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a
disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant. But as they
drew towards the end of it, their interest in the appearance of a
country which they were to inhabit overcame their dejection, and a
view of Barton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness. It
was a pleasant fertile spot, well wooded, and rich in pasture. After
winding along it for more than a mile, they reached their own house. A
small green court was the whole of its demesne in front; and a neat
wicket gate admitted them into it.

As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was comfortable and compact;
but as a cottage it was defective, for the building was regular, the
roof was tiled, the window shutters were not painted green, nor were
the walls covered with honeysuckles. A narrow passage led directly
through the house into the garden behind. On each side of the entrance
was a sitting room, about sixteen feet square; and beyond them were
the offices and the stairs. Four bedrooms and two garrets formed the
rest of the house. It had not been built many years and was in good
repair. In comparison of Norland, it was poor and small indeed!--but
the tears which recollection called forth as they entered the house
were soon dried away. They were cheered by the joy of the servants on
their arrival, and each for the sake of the others resolved to appear
happy. It was very early in September; the season was fine, and from
first seeing the place under the advantage of good weather, they
received an impression in its favour which was of material service in
recommending it to their lasting approbation.

The situation of the house was good. High hills rose immediately
behind, and at no great distance on each side; some of which were open
downs, the others cultivated and woody. The village of Barton was
chiefly on one of these hills, and formed a pleasant view from the
cottage windows. The prospect in front was more extensive; it
commanded the whole of the valley, and reached into the country
beyond. The hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley
in that direction; under another name, and in another course, it
branched out again between two of the steepest of them.

With the size and furniture of the house Mrs. Dashwood was upon the
whole well satisfied; for though her former style of life rendered
many additions to the latter indispensable, yet to add and improve was
a delight to her; and she had at this time ready money enough to
supply all that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments. "As
for the house itself, to be sure," said she, "it is too small for our
family, but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the
present, as it is too late in the year for improvements. Perhaps in
the spring, if I have plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we may
think about building. These parlors are both too small for such
parties of our friends as I hope to see often collected here; and I
have some thoughts of throwing the passage into one of them with
perhaps a part of the other, and so leave the remainder of that other
for an entrance; this, with a new drawing room which may be easily
added, and a bed-chamber and garret above, will make it a very snug
little cottage. I could wish the stairs were handsome. But one must
not expect every thing; though I suppose it would be no difficult
matter to widen them. I shall see how much I am before-hand with the
world in the spring, and we will plan our improvements accordingly."

In the mean time, till all these alterations could be made from the
savings of an income of five hundred a-year by a woman who never
saved in her life, they were wise enough to be contented with the
house as it was; and each of them was busy in arranging their
particular concerns, and endeavoring, by placing around them books and
other possessions, to form themselves a home. Marianne's pianoforte
was unpacked and properly disposed of; and Elinor's drawings were
affixed to the walls of their sitting room.

In such employments as these they were interrupted soon after
breakfast the next day by the entrance of their landlord, who called
to welcome them to Barton, and to offer them every accommodation from
his own house and garden in which theirs might at present be
deficient. Sir John Middleton was a good looking man about forty. He
had formerly visited at Stanhill, but it was too long for his young
cousins to remember him. His countenance was thoroughly good-humoured;
and his manners were as friendly as the style of his letter. Their
arrival seemed to afford him real satisfaction, and their comfort to
be an object of real solicitude to him. He said much of his earnest
desire of their living in the most sociable terms with his family, and
pressed them so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they
were better settled at home, that, though his entreaties were carried
to a point of perseverance beyond civility, they could not give
offence. His kindness was not confined to words; for within an hour
after he left them, a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit
arrived from the park, which was followed before the end of the day by
a present of game. He insisted, moreover, on conveying all their
letters to and from the post for them, and would not be denied the
satisfaction of sending them his newspaper every day.

Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him, denoting her
intention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood as soon as she could be assured
that her visit would be no inconvenience; and as this message was
answered by an invitation equally polite, her ladyship was introduced
to them the next day.

[Illustration: _So shy before company._]

They were, of course, very anxious to see a person on whom so much of
their comfort at Barton must depend; and the elegance of her
appearance was favourable to their wishes. Lady Middleton was not more
than six or seven and twenty; her face was handsome, her figure tall
and striking, and her address graceful. Her manners had all the
elegance which her husband's wanted. But they would have been improved
by some share of his frankness and warmth; and her visit was long
enough to detract something from their first admiration, by showing
that, though perfectly well-bred, she was reserved, cold, and had
nothing to say for herself beyond the most common-place inquiry or
remark.

Conversation however was not wanted, for Sir John was very chatty, and
Lady Middleton had taken the wise precaution of bringing with her
their eldest child, a fine little boy about six years old, by which
means there was one subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in
case of extremity, for they had to enquire his name and age, admire
his beauty, and ask him questions which his mother answered for him,
while he hung about her and held down his head, to the great surprise
of her ladyship, who wondered at his being so shy before company, as
he could make noise enough at home. On every formal visit a child
ought to be of the party, by way of provision for discourse. In the
present case it took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were
most like his father or mother, and in what particular he resembled
either, for of course every body differed, and every body was
astonished at the opinion of the others.

An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoods of debating on
the rest of the children, as Sir John would not leave the house
without securing their promise of dining at the park the next day.




CHAPTER VII


Barton Park was about half a mile from the cottage. The ladies had
passed near it in their way along the valley, but it was screened from
their view at home by the projection of a hill. The house was large
and handsome; and the Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitality
and elegance. The former was for Sir John's gratification, the latter
for that of his lady. They were scarcely ever without some friends
staying with them in the house, and they kept more company of every
kind than any other family in the neighbourhood. It was necessary to
the happiness of both; for however dissimilar in temper and outward
behaviour, they strongly resembled each other in that total want of
talent and taste which confined their employments, unconnected with
such as society produced, within a very narrow compass. Sir John was a
sportsman, Lady Middleton a mother. He hunted and shot, and she
humoured her children; and these were their only resources. Lady
Middleton had the advantage of being able to spoil her children all
the year round, while Sir John's independent employments were in
existence only half the time. Continual engagements at home and
abroad, however, supplied all the deficiencies of nature and
education; supported the good spirits of Sir John, and gave exercise
to the good breeding of his wife.

Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance of her table, and of
all her domestic arrangements; and from this kind of vanity was her
greatest enjoyment in any of their parties. But Sir John's
satisfaction in society was much more real; he delighted in collecting
about him more young people than his house would hold, and the noisier
they were the better was he pleased. He was a blessing to all the
juvenile part of the neighbourhood, for in summer he was for ever
forming parties to eat cold ham and chicken out of doors, and in
winter his private balls were numerous enough for any young lady who
was not suffering under the insatiable appetite of fifteen.

The arrival of a new family in the country was always a matter of joy
to him, and in every point of view he was charmed with the inhabitants
he had now procured for his cottage at Barton. The Miss Dashwoods were
young, pretty, and unaffected. It was enough to secure his good
opinion; for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could want to
make her mind as captivating as her person. The friendliness of his
disposition made him happy in accommodating those, whose situation
might be considered, in comparison with the past, as unfortunate. In
showing kindness to his cousins therefore he had the real satisfaction
of a good heart; and in settling a family of females only in his
cottage, he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman; for a sportsman,
though he esteems only those of his sex who are sportsmen likewise, is
not often desirous of encouraging their taste by admitting them to a
residence within his own manor.

Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters were met at the door of the house by
Sir John, who welcomed them to Barton Park with unaffected sincerity;
and as he attended them to the drawing room repeated to the young
ladies the concern which the same subject had drawn from him the day
before, at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them. They
would see, he said, only one gentleman there besides himself; a
particular friend who was staying at the park, but who was neither
very young nor very gay. He hoped they would all excuse the smallness
of the party, and could assure them it should never happen so again.
He had been to several families that morning in hopes of procuring
some addition to their number, but it was moonlight and every body was
full of engagements. Luckily Lady Middleton's mother had arrived at
Barton within the last hour, and as she was a very cheerful agreeable
woman, he hoped the young ladies would not find it so very dull as
they might imagine. The young ladies, as well as their mother, were
perfectly satisfied with having two entire strangers of the party, and
wished for no more.

Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, was a good-humoured, merry,
fat, elderly woman, who talked a great deal, seemed very happy, and
rather vulgar. She was full of jokes and laughter, and before dinner
was over had said many witty things on the subject of lovers and
husbands; hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex,
and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not. Marianne was
vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned her eyes towards Elinor
to see how she bore these attacks, with an earnestness which gave
Elinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place raillery
as Mrs. Jennings's.

Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed no more adapted by
resemblance of manner to be his friend, than Lady Middleton was to be
his wife, or Mrs. Jennings to be Lady Middleton's mother. He was
silent and grave. His appearance however was not unpleasing, in spite
of his being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret an absolute old
bachelor, for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty; but though
his face was not handsome, his countenance was sensible, and his
address was particularly gentlemanlike.

There was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them as
companions to the Dashwoods; but the cold insipidity of Lady Middleton
was so particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity
of Colonel Brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and his
mother-in-law was interesting. Lady Middleton seemed to be roused to
enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children after
dinner, who pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to
every kind of discourse except what related to themselves.

In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be musical, she was
invited to play. The instrument was unlocked, every body prepared to
be charmed, and Marianne, who sang very well, at their request went
through the chief of the songs which Lady Middleton had brought into
the family on her marriage, and which perhaps had lain ever since in
the same position on the pianoforte, for her ladyship had celebrated
that event by giving up music, although by her mother's account, she
had played extremely well, and by her own was very fond of it.

Marianne's performance was highly applauded. Sir John was loud in his
admiration at the end of every song, and as loud in his conversation
with the others while every song lasted. Lady Middleton frequently
called him to order, wondered how any one's attention could be
diverted from music for a moment, and asked Marianne to sing a
particular song which Marianne had just finished. Colonel Brandon
alone, of all the party, heard her without being in raptures. He paid
her only the compliment of attention; and she felt a respect for him
on the occasion, which the others had reasonably forfeited by their
shameless want of taste. His pleasure in music, though it amounted not
to that ecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own,
was estimable when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of
the others; and she was reasonable enough to allow that a man of five
and thirty might well have outlived all acuteness of feeling and every
exquisite power of enjoyment. She was perfectly disposed to make every
allowance for the colonel's advanced state of life which humanity
required.




CHAPTER VIII


Mrs. Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure. She had only two
daughters, both of whom she had lived to see respectably married, and
she had now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the
world. In the promotion of this object she was zealously active, as
far as her ability reached; and missed no opportunity of projecting
weddings among all the young people of her acquaintance. She was
remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments, and had enjoyed the
advantage of raising the blushes and the vanity of many a young lady
by insinuations of her power over such a young man; and this kind of
discernment enabled her soon after her arrival at Barton decisively to
pronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much in love with Marianne
Dashwood. She rather suspected it to be so, on the very first evening
of their being together, from his listening so attentively while she
sang to them; and when the visit was returned by the Middletons'
dining at the cottage, the fact was ascertained by his listening to
her again. It must be so. She was perfectly convinced of it. It would
be an excellent match, for _he_ was rich, and _she_ was handsome. Mrs.
Jennings had been anxious to see Colonel Brandon well married, ever
since her connection with Sir John first brought him to her knowledge;
and she was always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty
girl.

The immediate advantage to herself was by no means inconsiderable, for
it supplied her with endless jokes against them both. At the park she
laughed at the colonel, and in the cottage at Marianne. To the former
her raillery was probably, as far as it regarded only himself,
perfectly indifferent; but to the latter it was at first
incomprehensible; and when its object was understood, she hardly knew
whether most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence,
for she considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel's
advanced years, and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor.

Mrs. Dashwood, who could not think a man five years younger than
herself, so exceedingly ancient as he appeared to the youthful fancy
of her daughter, ventured to clear Mrs. Jennings from the probability
of wishing to throw ridicule on his age.

"But at least, Mamma, you cannot deny the absurdity of the accusation,
though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured. Colonel Brandon
is certainly younger than Mrs. Jennings, but he is old enough to be
_my_ father; and if he were ever animated enough to be in love, must
have long outlived every sensation of the kind. It is too ridiculous!
When is a man to be safe from such wit, if age and infirmity will not
protect him?"

"Infirmity!" said Elinor, "do you call Colonel Brandon infirm? I can
easily suppose that his age may appear much greater to you than to my
mother; but you can hardly deceive yourself as to his having the use
of his limbs!"

"Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism? and is not that the
commonest infirmity of declining life?"

"My dearest child," said her mother, laughing, "at this rate you must
be in continual terror of _my_ decay; and it must seem to you a
miracle that my life has been extended to the advanced age of forty."

"Mamma, you are not doing me justice. I know very well that Colonel
Brandon is not old enough to make his friends yet apprehensive of
losing him in the course of nature. He may live twenty years longer.
But thirty-five has nothing to do with matrimony."

"Perhaps," said Elinor, "thirty-five and seventeen had better not have
any thing to do with matrimony together. But if there should by any
chance happen to be a woman who is single at seven and twenty, I
should not think Colonel Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to
his marrying _her_ ."

"A woman of seven and twenty," said Marianne, after pausing a moment,
"can never hope to feel or inspire affection again, and if her home be
uncomfortable, or her fortune small, I can suppose that she might
bring herself to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of the
provision and security of a wife. In his marrying such a woman
therefore there would be nothing unsuitable. It would be a compact of
convenience, and the world would be satisfied. In my eyes it would be
no marriage at all, but that would be nothing. To me it would seem
only a commercial exchange, in which each wished to be benefited at
the expense of the other."

"It would be impossible, I know," replied Elinor, "to convince you
that a woman of seven and twenty could feel for a man of thirty-five
anything near enough to love, to make him a desirable companion to
her. But I must object to your dooming Colonel Brandon and his wife to
the constant confinement of a sick chamber, merely because he chanced
to complain yesterday (a very cold damp day) of a slight rheumatic
feel in one of his shoulders."

"But he talked of flannel waistcoats," said Marianne; "and with me a
flannel waistcoat is invariably connected with aches, cramps,
rheumatisms, and every species of ailment that can afflict the old and
the feeble."

"Had he been only in a violent fever, you would not have despised him
half so much. Confess, Marianne, is not there something interesting to
you in the flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"

Soon after this, upon Elinor's leaving the room, "Mamma," said
Marianne, "I have an alarm on the subject of illness which I cannot
conceal from you. I am sure Edward Ferrars is not well. We have now
been here almost a fortnight, and yet he does not come. Nothing but
real indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay. What else
can detain him at Norland?"

"Had you any idea of his coming so soon?" said Mrs. Dashwood. "I had
none. On the contrary, if I have felt any anxiety at all on the
subject, it has been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want
of pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation, when I talked of
his coming to Barton. Does Elinor expect him already?"

"I have never mentioned it to her, but of course she must."

"I rather think you are mistaken, for when I was talking to her
yesterday of getting a new grate for the spare bed-chamber, she
observed that there was no immediate hurry for it, as it was not
likely that the room would be wanted for some time."

"How strange this is! what can be the meaning of it! But the whole of
their behaviour to each other has been unaccountable! How cold, how
composed were their last adieus! How languid their conversation the
last evening of their being together! In Edward's farewell there was
no distinction between Elinor and me: it was the good wishes of an
affectionate brother to both. Twice did I leave them purposely
together in the course of the last morning, and each time did he most
unaccountably follow me out of the room. And Elinor, in quitting
Norland and Edward, cried not as I did. Even now her self-command is
invariable. When is she dejected or melancholy? When does she try to
avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it?"




CHAPTER IX


The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable comfort to
themselves. The house and the garden, with all the objects surrounding
them, were now become familiar, and the ordinary pursuits which had
given to Norland half its charms were engaged in again with far
greater enjoyment than Norland had been able to afford, since the loss
of their father. Sir John Middleton, who called on them every day for
the first fortnight, and who was not in the habit of seeing much
occupation at home, could not conceal his amazement on finding them
always employed.

Their visitors, except those from Barton Park, were not many; for, in
spite of Sir John's urgent entreaties that they would mix more in the
neighbourhood, and repeated assurances of his carriage being always at
their service, the independence of Mrs. Dashwood's spirit overcame the
wish of society for her children; and she was resolute in declining to
visit any family beyond the distance of a walk. There were but few who
could be so classed; and it was not all of them that were attainable.
About a mile and a half from the cottage, along the narrow winding
valley of Allenham, which issued from that of Barton, as formerly
described, the girls had, in one of their earliest walks, discovered
an ancient respectable looking mansion which, by reminding them a
little of Norland, interested their imagination and made them wish to
be better acquainted with it. But they learnt, on enquiry, that its
possessor, an elderly lady of very good character, was unfortunately
too infirm to mix with the world, and never stirred from home.

The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks. The high
downs which invited them from almost every window of the cottage to
seek the exquisite enjoyment of air on their summits, were a happy
alternative when the dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their
superior beauties; and towards one of these hills did Marianne and
Margaret one memorable morning direct their steps, attracted by the
partial sunshine of a showery sky, and unable longer to bear the
confinement which the settled rain of the two preceding days had
occasioned. The weather was not tempting enough to draw the two others
from their pencil and their book, in spite of Marianne's declaration
that the day would be lastingly fair, and that every threatening cloud
would be drawn off from their hills; and the two girls set off
together.

They gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their own penetration at
every glimpse of blue sky; and when they caught in their faces the
animating gales of a high south-westerly wind, they pitied the fears
which had prevented their mother and Elinor from sharing such
delightful sensations.

"Is there a felicity in the world," said Marianne, "superior to
this?--Margaret, we will walk here at least two hours."

Margaret agreed, and they pursued their way against the wind,
resisting it with laughing delight for about twenty minutes longer,
when suddenly the clouds united over their heads, and a driving rain
set full in their face. Chagrined and surprised, they were obliged,
though unwillingly, to turn back, for no shelter was nearer than their
own house. One consolation however remained for them, to which the
exigence of the moment gave more than usual propriety,--it was that of
running with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill which
led immediately to their garden gate.

They set off. Marianne had at first the advantage, but a false step
brought her suddenly to the ground; and Margaret, unable to stop
herself to assist her, was involuntarily hurried along, and reached
the bottom in safety.

A gentleman carrying a gun, with two pointers playing round him, was
passing up the hill and within a few yards of Marianne, when her
accident happened. He put down his gun and ran to her assistance. She
had raised herself from the ground, but her foot had been twisted in
her fall, and she was scarcely able to stand. The gentleman offered
his services; and perceiving that her modesty declined what her
situation rendered necessary, took her up in his arms without farther
delay, and carried her down the hill. Then passing through the garden,
the gate of which had been left open by Margaret, he bore her directly
into the house, whither Margaret was just arrived, and quitted not his
hold till he had seated her in a chair in the parlour.

Elinor and her mother rose up in amazement at their entrance, and
while the eyes of both were fixed on him with an evident wonder and a
secret admiration which equally sprung from his appearance, he
apologized for his intrusion by relating its cause, in a manner so
frank and so graceful that his person, which was uncommonly handsome,
received additional charms from his voice and expression. Had he been
even old, ugly, and vulgar, the gratitude and kindness of Mrs.
Dashwood would have been secured by any act of attention to her child;
but the influence of youth, beauty, and elegance, gave an interest to
the action which came home to her feelings.

She thanked him again and again; and, with a sweetness of address
which always attended her, invited him to be seated. But this he
declined, as he was dirty and wet. Mrs. Dashwood then begged to know
to whom she was obliged. His name, he replied, was Willoughby, and his
present home was at Allenham, from whence he hoped she would allow him
the honour of calling tomorrow to enquire after Miss Dashwood. The
honour was readily granted, and he then departed, to make himself
still more interesting, in the midst of a heavy rain.

His manly beauty and more than common gracefulness were instantly the
theme of general admiration, and the laugh which his gallantry raised
against Marianne received particular spirit from his exterior
attractions. Marianne herself had seen less of his person than the
rest, for the confusion which crimsoned over her face, on his lifting
her up, had robbed her of the power of regarding him after their
entering the house. But she had seen enough of him to join in all the
admiration of the others, and with an energy which always adorned her
praise. His person and air were equal to what her fancy had ever drawn
for the hero of a favourite story; and in his carrying her into the
house with so little previous formality, there was a rapidity of
thought which particularly recommended the action to her. Every
circumstance belonging to him was interesting. His name was good, his
residence was in their favourite village, and she soon found out that
of all manly dresses a shooting-jacket was the most becoming. Her
imagination was busy, her reflections were pleasant, and the pain of a
sprained ankle was disregarded.

Sir John called on them as soon as the next interval of fair weather
that morning allowed him to get out of doors; and Marianne's accident
being related to him, he was eagerly asked whether he knew any
gentleman of the name of Willoughby at Allenham.

"Willoughby!" cried Sir John; "what, is _he_ in the country? That is
good news however; I will ride over tomorrow, and ask him to dinner on
Thursday."

"You know him then," said Mrs. Dashwood.

"Know him! to be sure I do. Why, he is down here every year."

"And what sort of a young man is he?"

"As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, I assure you. A very decent
shot, and there is not a bolder rider in England."

"And is that all you can say for him?" cried Marianne, indignantly.
"But what are his manners on more intimate acquaintance? What his
pursuits, his talents, and genius?"

Sir John was rather puzzled.

"Upon my soul," said he, "I do not know much about him as to all
_that._ But he is a pleasant, good humoured fellow, and has got the
nicest little black bitch of a pointer I ever saw. Was she out with
him today?"

But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the colour of Mr.
Willoughby's pointer, than he could describe to her the shades of his
mind.

"But who is he?" said Elinor. "Where does he come from? Has he a house
at Allenham?"

On this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence; and he
told them that Mr. Willoughby had no property of his own in the
country; that he resided there only while he was visiting the old lady
at Allenham Court, to whom he was related, and whose possessions he
was to inherit; adding, "Yes, yes, he is very well worth catching I
can tell you, Miss Dashwood; he has a pretty little estate of his own
in Somersetshire besides; and if I were you, I would not give him up
to my younger sister, in spite of all this tumbling down hills. Miss
Marianne must not expect to have all the men to herself. Brandon will
be jealous, if she does not take care."

"I do not believe," said Mrs. Dashwood, with a good humoured smile,
"that Mr. Willoughby will be incommoded by the attempts of either of
_my_ daughters towards what you call _catching him._ It is not an
employment to which they have been brought up. Men are very safe with
us, let them be ever so rich. I am glad to find, however, from what
you say, that he is a respectable young man, and one whose
acquaintance will not be ineligible."

"He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe, as ever lived," repeated
Sir John. "I remember last Christmas at a little hop at the park, he
danced from eight o'clock till four, without once sitting down."

"Did he indeed?" cried Marianne with sparkling eyes, "and with
elegance, with spirit?"

"Yes; and he was up again at eight to ride to covert."

"That is what I like; that is what a young man ought to be. Whatever
be his pursuits, his eagerness in them should know no moderation, and
leave him no sense of fatigue."

"Aye, aye, I see how it will be," said Sir John, "I see how it will
be. You will be setting your cap at him now, and never think of poor
Brandon."

"That is an expression, Sir John," said Marianne, warmly, "which I
particularly dislike. I abhor every common-place phrase by which wit
is intended; and 'setting one's cap at a man,' or 'making a conquest,'
are the most odious of all. Their tendency is gross and illiberal; and
if their construction could ever be deemed clever, time has long ago
destroyed all its ingenuity."

Sir John did not much understand this reproof; but he laughed as
heartily as if he did, and then replied--

"Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say, one way or other.
Poor Brandon! he is quite smitten already, and he is very well worth
setting your cap at, I can tell you, in spite of all this tumbling
about and spraining of ankles."




CHAPTER X


Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, with more elegance than precision,
styled Willoughby, called at the cottage early the next morning to
make his personal enquiries. He was received by Mrs. Dashwood with
more than politeness; with a kindness which Sir John's account of him
and her own gratitude prompted; and every thing that passed during the
visit tended to assure him of the sense, elegance, mutual affection,
and domestic comfort of the family to whom accident had now introduced
him. Of their personal charms he had not required a second interview
to be convinced.

Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion, regular features, and a
remarkably pretty figure. Marianne was still handsomer. Her form,
though not so correct as her sister's, in having the advantage of
height, was more striking; and her face was so lovely, that when in
the common cant of praise, she was called a beautiful girl, truth was
less violently outraged than usually happens. Her skin was very brown,
but, from its transparency, her complexion was uncommonly brilliant;
her features were all good; her smile was sweet and attractive; and in
her eyes, which were very dark, there was a life, a spirit, an
eagerness, which could hardily be seen without delight. From
Willoughby their expression was at first held back, by the
embarrassment which the remembrance of his assistance created. But
when this passed away, when her spirits became collected, when she saw
that to the perfect good-breeding of the gentleman, he united
frankness and vivacity, and above all, when she heard him declare,
that of music and dancing he was passionately fond, she gave him such
a look of approbation as secured the largest share of his discourse to
herself for the rest of his stay.

It was only necessary to mention any favourite amusement to engage her
to talk. She could not be silent when such points were introduced, and
she had neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion. They speedily
discovered that their enjoyment of dancing and music was mutual, and
that it arose from a general conformity of judgment in all that
related to either. Encouraged by this to a further examination of his
opinions, she proceeded to question him on the subject of books; her
favourite authors were brought forward and dwelt upon with so
rapturous a delight, that any young man of five and twenty must have
been insensible indeed, not to become an immediate convert to the
excellence of such works, however disregarded before. Their taste was
strikingly alike. The same books, the same passages were idolized by
each; or if any difference appeared, any objection arose, it lasted no
longer than till the force of her arguments and the brightness of her
eyes could be displayed. He acquiesced in all her decisions, caught
all her enthusiasm; and long before his visit concluded, they
conversed with the familiarity of a long-established acquaintance.

"Well, Marianne," said Elinor, as soon as he had left them, "for _one_
morning I think you have done pretty well. You have already
ascertained Mr. Willoughby's opinion in almost every matter of
importance. You know what he thinks of Cowper and Scott; you are
certain of his estimating their beauties as he ought, and you have
received every assurance of his admiring Pope no more than is proper.
But how is your acquaintance to be long supported, under such
extraordinary despatch of every subject for discourse? You will soon
have exhausted each favourite topic. Another meeting will suffice to
explain his sentiments on picturesque beauty, and second marriages,
and then you can have nothing farther to ask."

"Elinor," cried Marianne, "is this fair? is this just? are my ideas so
scanty? But I see what you mean. I have been too much at my ease, too
happy, too frank. I have erred against every common-place notion of
decorum; I have been open and sincere where I ought to have been
reserved, spiritless, dull, and deceitful:--had I talked only of the
weather and the roads, and had I spoken only once in ten minutes, this
reproach would have been spared."

"My love," said her mother, "you must not be offended with Elinor--she
was only in jest. I should scold her myself, if she were capable of
wishing to check the delight of your conversation with our new
friend." Marianne was softened in a moment.

Willoughby, on his side, gave every proof of his pleasure in their
acquaintance, which an evident wish of improving it could offer. He
came to them every day. To enquire after Marianne was at first his
excuse; but the encouragement of his reception, to which every day
gave greater kindness, made such an excuse unnecessary before it had
ceased to be possible, by Marianne's perfect recovery. She was
confined for some days to the house; but never had any confinement
been less irksome. Willoughby was a young man of good abilities, quick
imagination, lively spirits, and open, affectionate manners. He was
exactly formed to engage Marianne's heart, for with all this, he
joined not only a captivating person, but a natural ardour of mind
which was now roused and increased by the example of her own, and
which recommended him to her affection beyond every thing else.

His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment. They read,
they talked, they sang together; his musical talents were
considerable; and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which
Edward had unfortunately wanted.

In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation he was as faultless as in Marianne's;
and Elinor saw nothing to censure in him but a propensity, in which he
strongly resembled and peculiarly delighted her sister, of saying too
much what he thought on every occasion, without attention to persons
or circumstances. In hastily forming and giving his opinion of other
people, in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of
undivided attention where his heart was engaged, and in slighting too
easily the forms of worldly propriety, he displayed a want of caution
which Elinor could not approve, in spite of all that he and Marianne
could say in its support.

Marianne began now to perceive that the desperation which had seized
her at sixteen and a half, of ever seeing a man who could satisfy her
ideas of perfection, had been rash and unjustifiable. Willoughby was
all that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour and in every
brighter period, as capable of attaching her; and his behaviour
declared his wishes to be in that respect as earnest, as his abilities
were strong.

[Illustration: _They sang together._]

Her mother too, in whose mind not one speculative thought of their
marriage had been raised, by his prospect of riches, was led before
the end of a week to hope and expect it; and secretly to congratulate
herself on having gained two such sons-in-law as Edward and
Willoughby.

Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which had so
early been discovered by his friends, now first became perceptible to
Elinor, when it ceased to be noticed by them. Their attention and wit
were drawn off to his more fortunate rival; and the raillery which the
other had incurred before any partiality arose, was removed when his
feelings began really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to
sensibility. Elinor was obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that
the sentiments which Mrs. Jennings had assigned him for her own
satisfaction, were now actually excited by her sister; and that
however a general resemblance of disposition between the parties might
forward the affection of Mr. Willoughby, an equally striking
opposition of character was no hindrance to the regard of Colonel
Brandon. She saw it with concern; for what could a silent man of five
and thirty hope, when opposed to a very lively one of five and twenty?
and as she could not even wish him successful, she heartily wished him
indifferent. She liked him--in spite of his gravity and reserve, she
beheld in him an object of interest. His manners, though serious, were
mild; and his reserve appeared rather the result of some oppression of
spirits than of any natural gloominess of temper. Sir John had dropped
hints of past injuries and disappointments, which justified her belief
of his being an unfortunate man, and she regarded him with respect and
compassion.

Perhaps she pitied and esteemed him the more because he was slighted
by Willoughby and Marianne, who, prejudiced against him for being
neither lively nor young, seemed resolved to undervalue his merits.

"Brandon is just the kind of man," said Willoughby one day, when they
were talking of him together, "whom every body speaks well of, and
nobody cares about; whom all are delighted to see, and nobody
remembers to talk to."

"That is exactly what I think of him," cried Marianne.

"Do not boast of it, however," said Elinor, "for it is injustice in
both of you. He is highly esteemed by all the family at the park, and
I never see him myself without taking pains to converse with him."

"That he is patronised by _you_," replied Willoughby, "is certainly in
his favour; but as for the esteem of the others, it is a reproach in
itself. Who would submit to the indignity of being approved by such a
woman as Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings, that could command the
indifference of any body else?"

"But perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and Marianne will
make amends for the regard of Lady Middleton and her mother. If their
praise is censure, your censure may be praise, for they are not more
undiscerning, than you are prejudiced and unjust."

"In defence of your _protégé_ you can even be saucy."

"My _protégé_, as you call him, is a sensible man; and sense will
always have attractions for me. Yes, Marianne, even in a man between
thirty and forty. He has seen a great deal of the world; has been
abroad, has read, and has a thinking mind. I have found him capable of
giving me much information on various subjects; and he has always
answered my inquiries with readiness of good-breeding and good
nature."

"That is to say," cried Marianne contemptuously, "he has told you,
that in the East Indies the climate is hot, and the mosquitoes are
troublesome."

"He _would_ have told me so, I doubt not, had I made any such
inquiries, but they happened to be points on which I had been
previously informed."

"Perhaps," said Willoughby, "his observations may have extended to the
existence of nabobs, gold mohrs, and palanquins."

"I may venture to say that _his_ observations have stretched much
further than _your_ candour. But why should you dislike him?"

"I do not dislike him. I consider him, on the contrary, as a very
respectable man, who has every body's good word, and nobody's notice;
who, has more money than he can spend, more time than he knows how to
employ, and two new coats every year."

"Add to which," cried Marianne, "that he has neither genius, taste,
nor spirit. That his understanding has no brilliancy, his feelings no
ardour, and his voice no expression."

"You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass," replied Elinor,
"and so much on the strength of your own imagination, that the
commendation I am able to give of him is comparatively cold and
insipid. I can only pronounce him to be a sensible man, well-bred,
well-informed, of gentle address, and, I believe, possessing an
amiable heart."

"Miss Dashwood," cried Willoughby, "you are now using me unkindly. You
are endeavouring to disarm me by reason, and to convince me against my
will. But it will not do. You shall find me as stubborn as you can be
artful. I have three unanswerable reasons for disliking Colonel
Brandon; he threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fine; he
has found fault with the hanging of my curricle, and I cannot persuade
him to buy my brown mare. If it will be any satisfaction to you,
however, to be told, that I believe his character to be in other
respects irreproachable, I am ready to confess it. And in return for
an acknowledgment, which must give me some pain, you cannot deny me
the privilege of disliking him as much as ever."




CHAPTER XI


Little had Mrs. Dashwood or her daughters imagined when they first
came into Devonshire, that so many engagements would arise to occupy
their time as shortly presented themselves, or that they should have
such frequent invitations and such constant visitors as to leave them
little leisure for serious employment. Yet such was the case. When
Marianne was recovered, the schemes of amusement at home and abroad,
which Sir John had been previously forming, were put into execution.
The private balls at the park then began; and parties on the water
were made and accomplished as often as a showery October would allow.
In every meeting of the kind Willoughby was included; and the ease and
familiarity which naturally attended these parties were exactly
calculated to give increasing intimacy to his acquaintance with the
Dashwoods, to afford him opportunity of witnessing the excellencies of
Marianne, of marking his animated admiration of her, and of receiving,
in her behaviour to himself, the most pointed assurance of her
affection.

Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment. She only wished
that it were less openly shown; and once or twice did venture to
suggest the propriety of some self-command to Marianne. But Marianne
abhorred all concealment where no real disgrace could attend
unreserve; and to aim at the restraint of sentiments which were not in
themselves illaudable, appeared to her not merely an unnecessary
effort, but a disgraceful subjection of reason to common-place and
mistaken notions. Willoughby thought the same; and their behaviour at
all times, was an illustration of their opinions.

When he was present she had no eyes for any one else. Every thing he
did, was right. Every thing he said, was clever. If their evenings at
the park were concluded with cards, he cheated himself and all the
rest of the party to get her a good hand. If dancing formed the
amusement of the night, they were partners for half the time; and when
obliged to separate for a couple of dances, were careful to stand
together and scarcely spoke a word to any body else. Such conduct made
them of course most exceedingly laughed at; but ridicule could not
shame, and seemed hardly to provoke them.

Mrs. Dashwood entered into all their feelings with a warmth which left
her no inclination for checking this excessive display of them. To her
it was but the natural consequence of a strong affection in a young
and ardent mind.

This was the season of happiness to Marianne. Her heart was devoted to
Willoughby, and the fond attachment to Norland, which she brought with
her from Sussex, was more likely to be softened than she had thought
it possible before, by the charms which his society bestowed on her
present home.

Elinor's happiness was not so great. Her heart was not so much at
ease, nor her satisfaction in their amusements so pure. They afforded
her no companion that could make amends for what she had left behind,
nor that could teach her to think of Norland with less regret than
ever. Neither Lady Middleton nor Mrs. Jennings could supply to her the
conversation she missed; although the latter was an everlasting
talker, and from the first had regarded her with a kindness which
ensured her a large share of her discourse. She had already repeated
her own history to Elinor three or four times; and had Elinor's memory
been equal to her means of improvement, she might have known very
early in their acquaintance all the particulars of Mr. Jennings's last
illness, and what he said to his wife a few minutes before he died.
Lady Middleton was more agreeable than her mother only in being more
silent. Elinor needed little observation to perceive that her reserve
was a mere calmness of manner with which sense had nothing to do.
Towards her husband and mother she was the same as to them; and
intimacy was therefore neither to be looked for nor desired. She had
nothing to say one day that she had not said the day before. Her
insipidity was invariable, for even her spirits were always the same;
and though she did not oppose the parties arranged by her husband,
provided every thing were conducted in style and her two eldest
children attended her, she never appeared to receive more enjoyment
from them than she might have experienced in sitting at home; and so
little did her presence add to the pleasure of the others, by any
share in their conversation, that they were sometimes only reminded of
her being amongst them by her solicitude about her troublesome boys.

In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaintance, did Elinor find
a person who could in any degree claim the respect of abilities,
excite the interest of friendship, or give pleasure as a companion.
Willoughby was out of the question. Her admiration and regard, even
her sisterly regard, was all his own; but he was a lover; his
attentions were wholly Marianne's, and a far less agreeable man might
have been more generally pleasing. Colonel Brandon, unfortunately for
himself, had no such encouragement to think only of Marianne, and in
conversing with Elinor he found the greatest consolation for the
indifference of her sister.

Elinor's compassion for him increased, as she had reason to suspect
that the misery of disappointed love had already been known to him.
This suspicion was given by some words which accidentally dropped from
him one evening at the park, when they were sitting down together by
mutual consent, while the others were dancing. His eyes were fixed on
Marianne, and, after a silence of some minutes, he said, with a faint
smile, "Your sister, I understand, does not approve of second
attachments."

"No," replied Elinor, "her opinions are all romantic."

"Or rather, as I believe, she considers them impossible to exist."

"I believe she does. But how she contrives it without reflecting on
the character of her own father, who had himself two wives, I know
not. A few years however will settle her opinions on the reasonable
basis of common sense and observation; and then they may be more easy
to define and to justify than they now are, by any body but herself."

"This will probably be the case," he replied; "and yet there is
something so amiable in the prejudices of a young mind, that one is
sorry to see them give way to the reception of more general opinions."

"I cannot agree with you there," said Elinor. "There are
inconveniences attending such feelings as Marianne's, which all the
charms of enthusiasm and ignorance of the world cannot atone for. Her
systems have all the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety at
nought; and a better acquaintance with the world is what I look
forward to as her greatest possible advantage."

After a short pause he resumed the conversation by saying--

"Does your sister make no distinction in her objections against a
second attachment? or is it equally criminal in every body? Are those
who have been disappointed in their first choice, whether from the
inconstancy of its object, or the perverseness of circumstances, to be
equally indifferent during the rest of their lives?"

"Upon my word, I am not acquainted with the minutiæ of her principles.
I only know that I never yet heard her admit any instance of a second
attachment's being pardonable."

"This," said he, "cannot hold; but a change, a total change of
sentiments--No, no, do not desire it; for when the romantic
refinements of a young mind are obliged to give way, how frequently
are they succeeded by such opinions as are but too common, and too
dangerous! I speak from experience. I once knew a lady who in temper
and mind greatly resembled your sister, who thought and judged like
her, but who from an enforced change--from a series of unfortunate
circumstances--" Here he stopped suddenly; appeared to think that he
had said too much, and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures,
which might not otherwise have entered Elinor's head. The lady would
probably have passed without suspicion, had he not convinced Miss
Dashwood that what concerned her ought not to escape his lips. As it
was, it required but a slight effort of fancy to connect his emotion
with the tender recollection of past regard. Elinor attempted no more.
But Marianne, in her place, would not have done so little. The whole
story would have been speedily formed under her active imagination;
and every thing established in the most melancholy order of disastrous
love.




CHAPTER XII


As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the next morning the
latter communicated a piece of news to her sister, which in spite of
all that she knew before of Marianne's imprudence and want of thought,
surprised her by its extravagant testimony of both. Marianne told her,
with the greatest delight, that Willoughby had given her a horse, one
that he had bred himself on his estate in Somersetshire, and which was
exactly calculated to carry a woman. Without considering that it was
not in her mother's plan to keep any horse, that if she were to alter
her resolution in favour of this gift, she must buy another for the
servant, and keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable
to receive them, she had accepted the present without hesitation, and
told her sister of it in raptures.

"He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire immediately for it,"
she added, "and when it arrives we will ride every day. You shall
share its use with me. Imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, the
delight of a gallop on some of these downs."

Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a dream of felicity to
comprehend all the unhappy truths which attended the affair; and for
some time she refused to submit to them. As to an additional servant,
the expense would be a trifle; Mamma she was sure would never object
to it; and any horse would do for _him_; he might always get one at
the park; as to a stable, the merest shed would be sufficient. Elinor
then ventured to doubt the propriety of her receiving such a present
from a man so little, or at least so lately known to her. This was too
much.

"You are mistaken, Elinor," said she warmly, "in supposing I know very
little of Willoughby. I have not known him long indeed, but I am much
better acquainted with him, than I am with any other creature in the
world, except yourself and mama. It is not time or opportunity that is
to determine intimacy; it is disposition alone. Seven years would be
insufficient to make some people acquainted with each other, and seven
days are more than enough for others. I should hold myself guilty of
greater impropriety in accepting a horse from my brother, than from
Willoughby. Of John I know very little, though we have lived together
for years; but of Willoughby my judgment has long been formed."

Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more. She knew her
sister's temper. Opposition on so tender a subject would only attach
her the more to her own opinion. But by an appeal to her affection for
her mother, by representing the inconveniences which that indulgent
mother must draw on herself, if (as would probably be the case) she
consented to this increase of establishment, Marianne was shortly
subdued; and she promised not to tempt her mother to such imprudent
kindness by mentioning the offer, and to tell Willoughby when she saw
him next, that it must be declined.

She was faithful to her word; and when Willoughby called at the
cottage, the same day, Elinor heard her express her disappointment to
him in a low voice, on being obliged to forego the acceptance of his
present. The reasons for this alteration were at the same time
related, and they were such as to make further entreaty on his side
impossible. His concern however was very apparent; and after
expressing it with earnestness, he added, in the same low voice, "But,
Marianne, the horse is still yours, though you cannot use it now. I
shall keep it only till you can claim it. When you leave Barton to
form your own establishment in a more lasting home, Queen Mab shall
receive you."

This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood; and in the whole of the
sentence, in his manner of pronouncing it, and in his addressing her
sister by her Christian name alone, she instantly saw an intimacy so
decided, a meaning so direct, as marked a perfect agreement between
them. From that moment she doubted not of their being engaged to each
other; and the belief of it created no other surprise than that she,
or any of their friends, should be left by tempers so frank, to
discover it by accident.

Margaret related something to her the next day, which placed this
matter in a still clearer light. Willoughby had spent the preceding
evening with them, and Margaret, by being left some time in the
parlour with only him and Marianne, had had opportunity for
observations, which, with a most important face, she communicated to
her eldest sister, when they were next by themselves.

"Oh, Elinor!" she cried, "I have such a secret to tell you about
Marianne. I am sure she will be married to Mr. Willoughby very soon."

"You have said so," replied Elinor, "almost every day since they first
met on High-church Down; and they had not known each other a week, I
believe, before you were certain that Marianne wore his picture round
her neck; but it turned out to be only the miniature of our great
uncle."

"But indeed this is quite another thing. I am sure they will be
married very soon, for he has got a lock of her hair."

"Take care, Margaret. It may be only the hair of some great uncle of
_his_."

"But, indeed, Elinor, it is Marianne's. I am almost sure it is, for I
saw him cut it off. Last night after tea, when you and mama went out
of the room, they were whispering and talking together as fast as
could be, and he seemed to be begging something of her, and presently
he took up her scissors and cut off a long lock of her hair, for it
was all tumbled down her back; and he kissed it, and folded it up in a
piece of white paper; and put it into his pocket-book."

For such particulars, stated on such authority, Elinor could not
withhold her credit; nor was she disposed to it, for the circumstance
was in perfect unison with what she had heard and seen herself.

Margaret's sagacity was not always displayed in a way so satisfactory
to her sister. When Mrs. Jennings attacked her one evening at the
park, to give the name of the young man who was Elinor's particular
favourite, which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her,
Margaret answered by looking at her sister, and saying, "I must not
tell, may I, Elinor?"

This of course made every body laugh; and Elinor tried to laugh too.
But the effort was painful. She was convinced that Margaret had fixed
on a person whose name she could not bear with composure to become a
standing joke with Mrs. Jennings.

[Illustration: _He cut off a long lock of her hair._]

Marianne felt for her most sincerely; but she did more harm than good
to the cause, by turning very red and saying in an angry manner to
Margaret--

"Remember that whatever your conjectures may be, you have no right to
repeat them."

"I never had any conjectures about it," replied Margaret; "it was you
who told me of it yourself."

This increased the mirth of the company, and Margaret was eagerly
pressed to say something more.

"Oh! pray, Miss Margaret, let us know all about it," said Mrs.
Jennings. "What is the gentleman's name?"

"I must not tell, ma'am. But I know very well what it is; and I know
where he is too."

"Yes, yes, we can guess where he is; at his own house at Norland to be
sure. He is the curate of the parish I dare say."

"No, _that_ he is not. He is of no profession at all."

"Margaret," said Marianne with great warmth, "you know that all this
is an invention of your own, and that there is no such person in
existence."

"Well, then, he is lately dead, Marianne, for I am sure there was such
a man once, and his name begins with an F."

Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for observing, at this
moment, "that it rained very hard," though she believed the
interruption to proceed less from any attention to her, than from her
ladyship's great dislike of all such inelegant subjects of raillery as
delighted her husband and mother. The idea however started by her, was
immediately pursued by Colonel Brandon, who was on every occasion
mindful of the feelings of others; and much was said on the subject of
rain by both of them. Willoughby opened the piano-forte, and asked
Marianne to sit down to it; and thus amidst the various endeavours of
different people to quit the topic, it fell to the ground. But not so
easily did Elinor recover from the alarm into which it had thrown her.

A party was formed this evening for going on the following day to see
a very fine place about twelve miles from Barton, belonging to a
brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon, without whose interest it could not
be seen, as the proprietor, who was then abroad, had left strict
orders on that head. The grounds were declared to be highly beautiful,
and Sir John, who was particularly warm in their praise, might be
allowed to be a tolerable judge, for he had formed parties to visit
them, at least, twice every summer for the last ten years. They
contained a noble piece of water--a sail on which was to a form a
great part of the morning's amusement; cold provisions were to be
taken, open carriages only to be employed, and every thing conducted
in the usual style of a complete party of pleasure.

To some few of the company it appeared rather a bold undertaking,
considering the time of year, and that it had rained every day for the
last fortnight; and Mrs. Dashwood, who had already a cold, was
persuaded by Elinor to stay at home.




CHAPTER XIII


Their intended excursion to Whitwell turned out very different from
what Elinor had expected. She was prepared to be wet through,
fatigued, and frightened; but the event was still more unfortunate,
for they did not go at all.

By ten o'clock the whole party was assembled at the park, where they
were to breakfast. The morning was rather favourable, though it had
rained all night, as the clouds were then dispersing across the sky,
and the sun frequently appeared. They were all in high spirits and
good humour, eager to be happy, and determined to submit to the
greatest inconveniences and hardships rather than be otherwise.

While they were at breakfast the letters were brought in. Among the
rest there was one for Colonel Brandon:--he took it, looked at the
direction, changed colour, and immediately left the room.

"What is the matter with Brandon?" said Sir John.

Nobody could tell.

"I hope he has had no bad news," said Lady Middleton. "It must be
something extraordinary that could make Colonel Brandon leave my
breakfast table so suddenly."

In about five minutes he returned.

"No bad news, Colonel, I hope;" said Mrs. Jennings, as soon as he
entered the room.

"None at all, ma'am, I thank you."

"Was it from Avignon? I hope it is not to say that your sister is
worse."

"No, ma'am. It came from town, and is merely a letter of business."

"But how came the hand to discompose you so much, if it was only a
letter of business? Come, come, this won't do, Colonel; so let us hear
the truth of it."

"My dear madam," said Lady Middleton, "recollect what you are saying."

"Perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin Fanny is married?" said
Mrs. Jennings, without attending to her daughter's reproof.

"No, indeed, it is not."

"Well, then, I know who it is from, Colonel. And I hope she is well."

"Whom do you mean, ma'am?" said he, colouring a little.

"Oh! you know who I mean."

"I am particularly sorry, ma'am," said he, addressing Lady Middleton,
"that I should receive this letter today, for it is on business which
requires my immediate attendance in town."

"In town!" cried Mrs. Jennings. "What can you have to do in town at
this time of year?"

"My own loss is great," he continued, "in being obliged to leave so
agreeable a party; but I am the more concerned, as I fear my presence
is necessary to gain your admittance at Whitwell."

What a blow upon them all was this!

"But if you write a note to the housekeeper, Mr. Brandon," said
Marianne, eagerly, "will it not be sufficient?"

He shook his head.

"We must go," said Sir John. "It shall not be put off when we are so
near it. You cannot go to town till tomorrow, Brandon, that is all."

"I wish it could be so easily settled. But it is not in my power to
delay my journey for one day!"

"If you would but let us know what your business is," said Mrs.
Jennings, "we might see whether it could be put off or not."

"You would not be six hours later," said Willoughby, "if you were to
defer your journey till our return."

"I cannot afford to lose _one_ hour."

Elinor then heard Willoughby say, in a low voice to Marianne, "There
are some people who cannot bear a party of pleasure. Brandon is one of
them. He was afraid of catching cold I dare say, and invented this
trick for getting out of it. I would lay fifty guineas the letter was
of his own writing."

"I have no doubt of it," replied Marianne.

"There is no persuading you to change your mind, Brandon, I know of
old," said Sir John, "when once you are determined on anything. But,
however, I hope you will think better of it. Consider, here are the
two Miss Careys come over from Newton, the three Miss Dashwoods walked
up from the cottage, and Mr. Willoughby got up two hours before his
usual time, on purpose to go to Whitwell."

Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being the cause of
disappointing the party; but at the same time declared it to be
unavoidable.

"Well, then, when will you come back again?"

"I hope we shall see you at Barton," added her ladyship, "as soon as
you can conveniently leave town; and we must put off the party to
Whitwell till you return."

"You are very obliging. But it is so uncertain, when I may have it in
my power to return, that I dare not engage for it at all."

"Oh! he must and shall come back," cried Sir John. "If he is not here
by the end of the week, I shall go after him."

"Ay, so do, Sir John," cried Mrs. Jennings, "and then perhaps you may
find out what his business is."

"I do not want to pry into other men's concerns. I suppose it is
something he is ashamed of."

Colonel Brandon's horses were announced.

"You do not go to town on horseback, do you?" added Sir John.

"No. Only to Honiton. I shall then go post."

"Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish you a good journey. But you
had better change your mind."

"I assure you it is not in my power."

He then took leave of the whole party.

"Is there no chance of my seeing you and your sisters in town this
winter, Miss Dashwood?"

"I am afraid, none at all."

"Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time than I should wish to
do."

To Marianne, he merely bowed and said nothing.

"Come Colonel," said Mrs. Jennings, "before you go, do let us know
what you are going about."

He wished her a good morning, and, attended by Sir John, left the
room.

The complaints and lamentations which politeness had hitherto
restrained, now burst forth universally; and they all agreed again and
again how provoking it was to be so disappointed.

"I can guess what his business is, however," said Mrs. Jennings
exultingly.

"Can you, ma'am?" said almost every body.

"Yes; it is about Miss Williams, I am sure."

"And who is Miss Williams?" asked Marianne.

"What! do not you know who Miss Williams is? I am sure you must have
heard of her before. She is a relation of the Colonel's, my dear; a
very near relation. We will not say how near, for fear of shocking the
young ladies." Then, lowering her voice a little, she said to Elinor,
"She is his natural daughter."

"Indeed!"

"Oh, yes; and as like him as she can stare. I dare say the Colonel
will leave her all his fortune."

When Sir John returned, he joined most heartily in the general regret
on so unfortunate an event; concluding however by observing, that as
they were all got together, they must do something by way of being
happy; and after some consultation it was agreed, that although
happiness could only be enjoyed at Whitwell, they might procure a
tolerable composure of mind by driving about the country. The
carriages were then ordered; Willoughby's was first, and Marianne
never looked happier than when she got into it. He drove through the
park very fast, and they were soon out of sight; and nothing more of
them was seen till their return, which did not happen till after the
return of all the rest. They both seemed delighted with their drive;
but said only in general terms that they had kept in the lanes, while
the others went on the downs.

It was settled that there should be a dance in the evening, and that
every body should be extremely merry all day long. Some more of the
Careys came to dinner, and they had the pleasure of sitting down
nearly twenty to table, which Sir John observed with great
contentment. Willoughby took his usual place between the two elder
Miss Dashwoods. Mrs. Jennings sat on Elinor's right hand; and they had
not been long seated, before she leant behind her and Willoughby, and
said to Marianne, loud enough for them both to hear, "I have found you
out in spite of all your tricks. I know where you spent the morning."

Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, "Where, pray?"

"Did not you know," said Willoughby, "that we had been out in my
curricle?"

"Yes, yes, Mr. Impudence, I know that very well, and I was determined
to find out _where_ you had been to. I hope you like your house, Miss
Marianne. It is a very large one, I know; and when I come to see you,
I hope you will have new-furnished it, for it wanted it very much when
I was there six years ago."

Marianne turned away in great confusion. Mrs. Jennings laughed
heartily; and Elinor found that in her resolution to know where they
had been, she had actually made her own woman enquire of Mr.
Willoughby's groom; and that she had by that method been informed that
they had gone to Allenham, and spent a considerable time there in
walking about the garden and going all over the house.

Elinor could hardly believe this to be true, as it seemed very
unlikely that Willoughby should propose, or Marianne consent, to enter
the house while Mrs. Smith was in it, with whom Marianne had not the
smallest acquaintance.

As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor enquired of her about it;
and great was her surprise when she found that every circumstance
related by Mrs. Jennings was perfectly true. Marianne was quite angry
with her for doubting it.

"Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did not go there, or that we
did not see the house? Is not it what you have often wished to do
yourself?"

"Yes, Marianne, but I would not go while Mrs. Smith was there, and
with no other companion than Mr. Willoughby."

[Illustration: "_I have found you out in spite of all your tricks._"]

"Mr. Willoughby however is the only person who can have a right to
show that house; and as he went in an open carriage, it was
impossible to have any other companion. I never spent a pleasanter
morning in my life."

"I am afraid," replied Elinor, "that the pleasantness of an employment
does not always evince its propriety."

"On the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof of it, Elinor; for
if there had been any real impropriety in what I did, I should have
been sensible of it at the time, for we always know when we are acting
wrong, and with such a conviction I could have had no pleasure."

"But, my dear Marianne, as it has already exposed you to some very
impertinent remarks, do you not now begin to doubt the discretion of
your own conduct?"

"If the impertinent remarks of Mrs. Jennings are to be the proof of
impropriety in conduct, we are all offending every moment of our
lives. I value not her censure any more than I should do her
commendation. I am not sensible of having done anything wrong in
walking over Mrs. Smith's grounds, or in seeing her house. They will
one day be Mr. Willoughby's, and--"

"If they were one day to be your own, Marianne, you would not be
justified in what you have done."

She blushed at this hint; but it was even visibly gratifying to her;
and after a ten minutes' interval of earnest thought, she came to her
sister again, and said with great good humour, "Perhaps, Elinor, it
_was_ rather ill-judged in me to go to Allenham; but Mr. Willoughby
wanted particularly to show me the place; and it is a charming house,
I assure you. There is one remarkably pretty sitting room up stairs;
of a nice comfortable size for constant use, and with modern furniture
it would be delightful. It is a corner room, and has windows on two
sides. On one side you look across the bowling-green, behind the
house, to a beautiful hanging wood, and on the other you have a view
of the church and village, and, beyond them, of those fine bold hills
that we have so often admired. I did not see it to advantage, for
nothing could be more forlorn than the furniture; but if it were newly
fitted up--a couple of hundred pounds, Willoughby says, would make it
one of the pleasantest summer-rooms in England."

Could Elinor have listened to her without interruption from the
others, she would have described every room in the house with equal
delight.




CHAPTER XIV


The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon's visit at the park, with
his steadiness in concealing its cause, filled the mind, and raised
the wonder of Mrs. Jennings for two or three days; she was a great
wonderer, as every one must be who takes a very lively interest in all
the comings and goings of all their acquaintance. She wondered, with
little intermission what could be the reason of it; was sure there
must be some bad news, and thought over every kind of distress that
could have befallen him, with a fixed determination that he should not
escape them all.

"Something very melancholy must be the matter, I am sure," said she.
"I could see it in his face. Poor man! I am afraid his circumstances
may be bad. The estate at Delaford was never reckoned more than two
thousand a year, and his brother left everything sadly involved. I do
think he must have been sent for about money matters, for what else
can it be? I wonder whether it is so. I would give anything to know
the truth of it. Perhaps it is about Miss Williams and, by the bye, I
dare say it is, because he looked so conscious when I mentioned her.
May be she is ill in town; nothing in the world more likely, for I
have a notion she is always rather sickly. I would lay any wager it is
about Miss Williams. It is not so very likely he should be distressed
in his circumstances _now_, for he is a very prudent man, and to be
sure must have cleared the estate by this time. I wonder what it can
be! May be his sister is worse at Avignon, and has sent for him over.
His setting off in such a hurry seems very like it. Well, I wish him
out of all his trouble with all my heart, and a good wife into the
bargain."

So wondered, so talked Mrs. Jennings. Her opinion varying with every
fresh conjecture, and all seeming equally probable as they arose.
Elinor, though she felt really interested in the welfare of Colonel
Brandon, could not bestow all the wonder on his going so suddenly
away, which Mrs. Jennings was desirous of her feeling; for besides
that the circumstance did not in her opinion justify such lasting
amazement or variety of speculation, her wonder was otherwise
disposed of. It was engrossed by the extraordinary silence of her
sister and Willoughby on the subject, which they must know to be
peculiarly interesting to them all. As this silence continued, every
day made it appear more strange and more incompatible with the
disposition of both. Why they should not openly acknowledge to her
mother and herself, what their constant behaviour to each other
declared to have taken place, Elinor could not imagine.

She could easily conceive that marriage might not be immediately in
their power; for though Willoughby was independent, there was no
reason to believe him rich. His estate had been rated by Sir John at
about six or seven hundred a year; but he lived at an expense to which
that income could hardly be equal, and he had himself often complained
of his poverty. But for this strange kind of secrecy maintained by
them relative to their engagement, which in fact concealed nothing at
all, she could not account; and it was so wholly contradictory to
their general opinions and practice, that a doubt sometimes entered
her mind of their being really engaged, and this doubt was enough to
prevent her making any inquiry of Marianne.

Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to them all, than
Willoughby's behaviour. To Marianne it had all the distinguishing
tenderness which a lover's heart could give, and to the rest of the
family it was the affectionate attention of a son and a brother. The
cottage seemed to be considered and loved by him as his home; many
more of his hours were spent there than at Allenham; and if no general
engagement collected them at the park, the exercise which called him
out in the morning was almost certain of ending there, where the rest
of the day was spent by himself at the side of Marianne, and by his
favourite pointer at her feet.

One evening in particular, about a week after Colonel Brandon left the
country, his heart seemed more than usually open to every feeling of
attachment to the objects around him; and on Mrs. Dashwood's happening
to mention her design of improving the cottage in the spring, he
warmly opposed every alteration of a place which affection had
established as perfect with him.

"What!" he exclaimed, "Improve this dear cottage! No. _That_ I will
never consent to. Not a stone must be added to its walls, not an inch
to its size, if my feelings are regarded."

"Do not be alarmed," said Miss Dashwood, "nothing of the kind will be
done; for my mother will never have money enough to attempt it."

"I am heartily glad of it," he cried. "May she always be poor, if she
can employ her riches no better."

"Thank you, Willoughby. But you may be assured that I would not
sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of yours, or of any one
whom I loved, for all the improvements in the world. Depend upon it
that whatever unemployed sum may remain, when I make up my accounts in
the spring, I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose of it
in a manner so painful to you. But are you really so attached to this
place as to see no defect in it?"

"I am," said he. "To me it is faultless. Nay, more, I consider it as
the only form of building in which happiness is attainable, and were I
rich enough I would instantly pull Combe down, and build it up again
in the exact plan of this cottage."

"With dark narrow stairs and a kitchen that smokes, I suppose," said
Elinor.

"Yes," cried he in the same eager tone, "with all and every thing
belonging to it--in no one convenience or inconvenience about it,
should the least variation be perceptible. Then, and then only, under
such a roof, I might perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been at
Barton."

"I flatter myself," replied Elinor, "that even under the disadvantage
of better rooms and a broader staircase, you will hereafter find your
own house as faultless as you now do this."

"There certainly are circumstances," said Willoughby, "which might
greatly endear it to me; but this place will always have one claim of
my affection, which no other can possibly share."

Mrs. Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne, whose fine eyes were
fixed so expressively on Willoughby, as plainly denoted how well she
understood him.

"How often did I wish," added he, "when I was at Allenham this time
twelvemonth, that Barton cottage were inhabited! I never passed within
view of it without admiring its situation, and grieving that no one
should live in it. How little did I then think that the very first
news I should hear from Mrs. Smith, when I next came into the country,
would be that Barton cottage was taken: and I felt an immediate
satisfaction and interest in the event, which nothing but a kind of
prescience of what happiness I should experience from it, can account
for. Must it not have been so, Marianne?" speaking to her in a lowered
voice. Then continuing his former tone, he said, "And yet this house
you would spoil, Mrs. Dashwood? You would rob it of its simplicity by
imaginary improvement! and this dear parlour in which our acquaintance
first began, and in which so many happy hours have been since spent by
us together, you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance,
and every body would be eager to pass through the room which has
hitherto contained within itself more real accommodation and comfort
than any other apartment of the handsomest dimensions in the world
could possibly afford."

Mrs. Dashwood again assured him that no alteration of the kind should
be attempted.

"You are a good woman," he warmly replied. "Your promise makes me
easy. Extend it a little farther, and it will make me happy. Tell me
that not only your house will remain the same, but that I shall ever
find you and yours as unchanged as your dwelling; and that you will
always consider me with the kindness which has made everything
belonging to you so dear to me."

The promise was readily given, and Willoughby's behaviour during the
whole of the evening declared at once his affection and happiness.

"Shall we see you tomorrow to dinner?" said Mrs. Dashwood, when he was
leaving them. "I do not ask you to come in the morning, for we must
walk to the park, to call on Lady Middleton."

He engaged to be with them by four o'clock.




CHAPTER XV


Mrs. Dashwood's visit to Lady Middleton took place the next day, and
two of her daughters went with her; but Marianne excused herself from
being of the party, under some trifling pretext of employment; and her
mother, who concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby the
night before of calling on her while they were absent, was perfectly
satisfied with her remaining at home.

On their return from the park they found Willoughby's curricle and
servant in waiting at the cottage, and Mrs. Dashwood was convinced
that her conjecture had been just. So far it was all as she had
foreseen; but on entering the house she beheld what no foresight had
taught her to expect. They were no sooner in the passage than Marianne
came hastily out of the parlour apparently in violent affliction, with
her handkerchief at her eyes; and without noticing them ran up stairs.
Surprised and alarmed they proceeded directly into the room she had
just quitted, where they found only Willoughby, who was leaning
against the mantelpiece with his back towards them. He turned round
on their coming in, and his countenance showed that he strongly
partook of the emotion which overpowered Marianne.

"Is anything the matter with her?" cried Mrs. Dashwood as she
entered:--"is she ill?"

"I hope not," he replied, trying to look cheerful; and with a forced
smile presently added, "It is I who may rather expect to be ill--for I
am now suffering under a very heavy disappointment!"

"Disappointment?"

"Yes, for I am unable to keep my engagement with you. Mrs. Smith has
this morning exercised the privilege of riches upon a poor dependent
cousin, by sending me on business to London. I have just received my
dispatches, and taken my farewell of Allenham; and by way of
exhilaration I am now come to take my farewell of you."

"To London!--and are you going this morning?"

"Almost this moment."

[Illustration: _Apparently in violent affliction._]

"This is very unfortunate. But Mrs. Smith must be obliged, and her
business will not detain you from us long I hope."

He coloured as he replied, "You are very kind, but I have no idea of
returning into Devonshire immediately. My visits to Mrs. Smith are
never repeated within the twelvemonth."

"And is Mrs. Smith your only friend? Is Allenham the only house in the
neighbourhood to which you will be welcome? For shame, Willoughby, can
you wait for an invitation here?"

His colour increased; and with his eyes fixed on the ground he only
replied, "You are too good."

Mrs. Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise. Elinor felt equal
amazement. For a few moments every one was silent. Mrs. Dashwood first
spoke.

"I have only to add, my dear Willoughby, that at Barton cottage you
will always be welcome; for I will not press you to return here
immediately, because you only can judge how far _that_ might be
pleasing to Mrs. Smith; and on this head I shall be no more disposed
to question your judgment than to doubt your inclination."

"My engagements at present," replied Willoughby, confusedly, "are of
such a nature--that--I dare not flatter myself--"

He stopped. Mrs. Dashwood was too much astonished to speak, and
another pause succeeded. This was broken by Willoughby, who said with
a faint smile, "It is folly to linger in this manner. I will not
torment myself any longer by remaining among friends whose society it
is impossible for me now to enjoy."

He then hastily took leave of them all and left the room. They saw him
step into his carriage, and in a minute it was out of sight.

Mrs. Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly quitted the
parlour to give way in solitude to the concern and alarm which this
sudden departure occasioned.

Elinor's uneasiness was at least equal to her mother's. She thought of
what had just passed with anxiety and distrust. Willoughby's behaviour
in taking leave of them, his embarrassment, and affectation of
cheerfulness, and, above all, his unwillingness to accept her mother's
invitation--a backwardness so unlike a lover, so unlike
himself--greatly disturbed her. One moment she feared that no serious
design had ever been formed on his side; and the next that some
unfortunate quarrel had taken place between him and her sister. The
distress in which Marianne had quitted the room was such as a serious
quarrel could most reasonably account for, though when she considered
what Marianne's love for him was, a quarrel seemed almost impossible.

But whatever might be the particulars of their separation, her
sister's affliction was indubitable; and she thought with the
tenderest compassion of that violent sorrow which Marianne was in all
probability not merely giving way to as a relief, but feeding and
encouraging as a duty.

In about half an hour her mother returned, and though her eyes were
red, her countenance was not uncheerful.

"Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Barton, Elinor," said she,
as she sat down to work, "and with how heavy a heart does he travel?"

"It is all very strange. So suddenly to be gone! It seems but the work
of a moment. And last night he was with us so happy, so cheerful, so
affectionate? And now, after only ten minutes notice,--gone too
without intending to return! Something more than what he owned to us
must have happened. He did not speak, he did not behave like himself.
_You_ must have seen the difference as well as I. What can it be? Can
they have quarrelled? Why else should he have shown such unwillingness
to accept your invitation here?"

"It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor; I could plainly see
_that._ He had not the power of accepting it. I have thought it all
over I assure you, and I can perfectly account for every thing that at
first seemed strange to me as well as to you."

"Can you, indeed!"

"Yes. I have explained it to myself in the most satisfactory way; but
you, Elinor, who love to doubt where you can--it will not satisfy
_you_, I know; but you shall not talk _me_ out of my trust in it. I am
persuaded that Mrs. Smith suspects his regard for Marianne,
disapproves of it, (perhaps because she has other views for him,) and
on that account is eager to get him away; and that the business which
she sends him off to transact is invented as an excuse to dismiss
him. This is what I believe to have happened. He is, moreover, aware
that she _does_ disapprove the connection, he dares not therefore at
present confess to her his engagement with Marianne, and he feels
himself obliged, from his dependent situation, to give into her
schemes, and absent himself from Devonshire for a while. You will tell
me, I know, that this may or may _not_ have happened; but I will
listen to no cavil, unless you can point out any other method of
understanding the affair as satisfactory at this. And now, Elinor,
what have you to say?"

"Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer."

"Then you would have told me, that it might or might not have
happened. Oh, Elinor, how incomprehensible are your feelings! You had
rather take evil upon credit than good. You had rather look out for
misery for Marianne, and guilt for poor Willoughby, than an apology
for the latter. You are resolved to think him blamable, because he
took leave of us with less affection than his usual behaviour has
shown. And is no allowance to be made for inadvertence, or for spirits
depressed by recent disappointment? Are no probabilities to be
accepted, merely because they are not certainties? Is nothing due to
the man whom we have all such reason to love, and no reason in the
world to think ill of?--to the possibility of motives unanswerable in
themselves, though unavoidably secret for a while? And, after all,
what is it you suspect him of?"

"I can hardly tell myself. But suspicion of something unpleasant is
the inevitable consequence of such an alteration as we just witnessed
in him. There is great truth, however, in what you have now urged of
the allowances which ought to be made for him, and it is my wish to be
candid in my judgment of every body. Willoughby may undoubtedly have
very sufficient reasons for his conduct, and I will hope that he has.
But it would have been more like Willoughby to acknowledge them at
once. Secrecy may be advisable; but still I cannot help wondering at
its being practiced by him."

"Do not blame him, however, for departing from his character, where
the deviation is necessary. But you really do admit the justice of
what I have said in his defence?--I am happy--and he is acquitted."

"Not entirely. It may be proper to conceal their engagement (if they
_are_ engaged) from Mrs. Smith; and if that is the case, it must be
highly expedient for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at
present. But this is no excuse for their concealing it from us."

"Concealing it from us! my dear child, do you accuse Willoughby and
Marianne of concealment? This is strange indeed, when your eyes have
been reproaching them every day for incautiousness."

"I want no proof of their affection," said Elinor; "but of their
engagement I do."

"I am perfectly satisfied of both."

"Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the subject, by either of
them."

"I have not wanted syllables where actions have spoken so plainly. Has
not his behaviour to Marianne and to all of us, for at least the last
fortnight, declared that he loved and considered her as his future
wife, and that he felt for us the attachment of the nearest relation?
Have we not perfectly understood each other? Has not my consent been
daily asked by his looks, his manner, his attentive and affectionate
respect? My Elinor, is it possible to doubt their engagement? How
could such a thought occur to you? How is it to be supposed that
Willoughby, persuaded as he must be of your sister's love, should
leave her, and leave her perhaps for months, without telling her of
his affection,--that they should part without a mutual exchange of
confidence?"

"I confess," replied Elinor, "that every circumstance except _one_ is
in favour of their engagement; but that _one_ is the total silence of
both on the subject, and with me it almost outweighs every other."

"How strange this is! You must think wretchedly indeed of Willoughby,
if, after all that has openly passed between them, you can doubt the
nature of the terms on which they are together. Has he been acting a
part in his behaviour to your sister all this time? Do you suppose him
really indifferent to her?"

"No, I cannot think that. He must and does love her I am sure."

"But with a strange kind of tenderness, if he can leave her with such
indifference, such carelessness of the future, as you attribute to
him."

"You must remember, my dear mother, that I have never considered this
matter as certain. I have had my doubts, I confess; but they are
fainter than they were, and they may soon be entirely done away. If we
find they correspond, every fear of mine will be removed."

"A mighty concession indeed! If you were to see them at the altar, you
would suppose they were going to be married. Ungracious girl! But I
require no such proof. Nothing in my opinion has ever passed to
justify doubt; no secrecy has been attempted; all has been uniformly
open and unreserved. You cannot doubt your sister's wishes. It must be
Willoughby therefore whom you suspect. But why? Is he not a man of
honour and feeling? Has there been any inconsistency on his side to
create alarm? can he be deceitful?"

"I hope not, I believe not," cried Elinor. "I love Willoughby,
sincerely love him; and suspicion of his integrity cannot be more
painful to yourself than to me. It has been involuntary, and I will
not encourage it. I was startled, I confess, by the alteration in his
manners this morning; he did not speak like himself, and did not
return your kindness with any cordiality. But all this may be
explained by such a situation of his affairs as you have supposed. He
had just parted from my sister, had seen her leave him in the greatest
affliction; and if he felt obliged, from a fear of offending Mrs.
Smith, to resist the temptation of returning here soon, and yet aware
that by declining your invitation, by saying that he was going away
for some time, he should seem to act an ungenerous, a suspicious part
by our family, he might well be embarrassed and disturbed. In such a
case, a plain and open avowal of his difficulties would have been more
to his honour I think, as well as more consistent with his general
character;--but I will not raise objections against any one's conduct
on so illiberal a foundation, as a difference in judgment from myself,
or a deviation from what I may think right and consistent."

"You speak very properly. Willoughby certainly does not deserve to be
suspected. Though _we_ have not known him long, he is no stranger in
this part of the world; and who has ever spoken to his disadvantage?
Had he been in a situation to act independently and marry immediately,
it might have been odd that he should leave us without acknowledging
everything to me at once: but this is not the case. It is an
engagement in some respects not prosperously begun, for their marriage
must be at a very uncertain distance; and even secrecy, as far as it
can be observed, may now be very advisable."

They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret; and Elinor was then
at liberty to think over the representations of her mother, to
acknowledge the probability of many, and hope for the justice of all.

They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time, when she entered the
room and took her place at the table without saying a word. Her eyes
were red and swollen; and it seemed as if her tears were even then
restrained with difficulty. She avoided the looks of them all, could
neither eat nor speak, and after some time, on her mother's silently
pressing her hand with tender compassion, her small degree of
fortitude was quite overcome, she burst into tears and left the room.

This violent oppression of spirits continued the whole evening. She
was without any power, because she was without any desire of command
over herself. The slightest mention of anything relative to Willoughby
overpowered her in an instant; and though her family were most
anxiously attentive to her comfort, it was impossible for them, if
they spoke at all, to keep clear of every subject which her feelings
connected with him.




CHAPTER XVI


Marianne would have thought herself very inexcusable had she been able
to sleep at all the first night after parting from Willoughby. She
would have been ashamed to look her family in the face the next
morning, had she not risen from her bed in more need of repose than
when she lay down in it. But the feelings which made such composure a
disgrace, left her in no danger of incurring it. She was awake the
whole night, and she wept the greatest part of it. She got up with a
headache, was unable to talk, and unwilling to take any nourishment;
giving pain every moment to her mother and sisters, and forbidding
all attempt at consolation from either. Her sensibility was potent
enough!

When breakfast was over she walked out by herself, and wandered about
the village of Allenham, indulging the recollection of past enjoyment
and crying over the present reverse for the chief of the morning.

The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feeling. She played
over every favourite song that she had been used to play to
Willoughby, every air in which their voices had been oftenest joined,
and sat at the instrument gazing on every line of music that he had
written out for her, till her heart was so heavy that no farther
sadness could be gained; and this nourishment of grief was every day
applied. She spent whole hours at the pianoforte alternately singing
and crying; her voice often totally suspended by her tears. In books
too, as well as in music, she courted the misery which a contrast
between the past and present was certain of giving. She read nothing
but what they had been used to read together.

Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supported for ever; it
sunk within a few days into a calmer melancholy; but these
employments, to which she daily recurred, her solitary walks and
silent meditations, still produced occasional effusions of sorrow as
lively as ever.

No letter from Willoughby came; and none seemed expected by Marianne.
Her mother was surprised, and Elinor again became uneasy. But Mrs.
Dashwood could find explanations whenever she wanted them, which at
least satisfied herself.

"Remember, Elinor," said she, "how very often Sir John fetches our
letters himself from the post, and carries them to it. We have already
agreed that secrecy may be necessary, and we must acknowledge that it
could not be maintained if their correspondence were to pass through
Sir John's hands."

Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she tried to find in it a
motive sufficient for their silence. But there was one method so
direct, so simple, and in her opinion so eligible of knowing the real
state of the affair, and of instantly removing all mystery, that she
could not help suggesting it to her mother.

"Why do you not ask Marianne at once," said she, "whether she is or
she is not engaged to Willoughby? From you, her mother, and so kind,
so indulgent a mother, the question could not give offence. It would
be the natural result of your affection for her. She used to be all
unreserve, and to you more especially."

"I would not ask such a question for the world. Supposing it possible
that they are not engaged, what distress would not such an enquiry
inflict! At any rate it would be most ungenerous. I should never
deserve her confidence again, after forcing from her a confession of
what is meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one. I know
Marianne's heart: I know that she dearly loves me, and that I shall
not be the last to whom the affair is made known, when circumstances
make the revealment of it eligible. I would not attempt to force the
confidence of any one; of a child much less; because a sense of duty
would prevent the denial which her wishes might direct."

Elinor thought this generosity overstrained, considering her sister's
youth, and urged the matter farther, but in vain; common sense, common
care, common prudence, were all sunk in Mrs. Dashwood's romantic
delicacy.

It was several days before Willoughby's name was mentioned before
Marianne by any of her family; Sir John and Mrs. Jennings, indeed,
were not so nice; their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour;
but one evening, Mrs. Dashwood, accidentally taking up a volume of
Shakespeare, exclaimed--

"We have never finished _Hamlet_, Marianne; our dear Willoughby went
away before we could get through it. We will put it by, that when he
comes again--; But it may be months, perhaps, before _that_ happens."

"Months!" cried Marianne, with strong surprise. "No--nor many weeks."

Mrs. Dashwood was sorry for what she had said; but it gave Elinor
pleasure, as it produced a reply from Marianne so expressive of
confidence in Willoughby and knowledge of his intentions.

One morning, about a week after his leaving the country, Marianne was
prevailed on to join her sisters in their usual walk, instead of
wandering away by herself. Hitherto she had carefully avoided every
companion in her rambles. If her sisters intended to walk on the
downs, she directly stole away towards the lanes; if they talked of
the valley, she was as speedy in climbing the hills, and could never
be found when the others set off. But at length she was secured by the
exertions of Elinor, who greatly disapproved such continual seclusion.
They walked along the road through the valley, and chiefly in silence,
for Marianne's _mind_ could not be controlled, and Elinor, satisfied
with gaining one point, would not then attempt more. Beyond the
entrance of the valley, where the country, though still rich, was less
wild and more open, a long stretch of the road which they had
travelled on first coming to Barton, lay before them; and on reaching
that point, they stopped to look around them, and examine a prospect
which formed the distance of their view from the cottage, from a spot
which they had never happened to reach in any of their walks before.

Amongst the objects in the scene, they soon discovered an animated
one; it was a man on horseback riding towards them. In a few minutes
they could distinguish him to be a gentleman; and in a moment
afterwards Marianne rapturously exclaimed--

"It is he; it is indeed--I know it is!" and was hastening to meet him,
when Elinor cried out--

"Indeed, Marianne, I think you are mistaken. It is not Willoughby. The
person is not tall enough for him, and has not his air."

"He has, he has," cried Marianne, "I am sure he has. His air, his
coat, his horse. I knew how soon he would come."

She walked eagerly on as she spoke; and Elinor, to screen Marianne
from particularity, as she felt almost certain of its not being
Willoughby, quickened her pace and kept up with her. They were soon
within thirty yards of the gentleman. Marianne looked again; her heart
sunk within her; and abruptly turning round, she was hurrying back,
when the voices of both her sisters were raised to detain her; a
third, almost as well known as Willoughby's, joined them in begging
her to stop, and she turned round with surprise to see and welcome
Edward Ferrars.

[Illustration: _Begging her to stop._]

He was the only person in the world who could at that moment be
forgiven for not being Willoughby; the only one who could have gained
a smile from her; but she dispersed her tears to smile on _him_, and
in her sister's happiness forgot for a time her own disappointment.

He dismounted, and giving his horse to his servant, walked back with
them to Barton, whither he was purposely coming to visit them.

He was welcomed by them all with great cordiality, but especially by
Marianne, who showed more warmth of regard in her reception of him
than even Elinor herself. To Marianne, indeed, the meeting between
Edward and her sister was but a continuation of that unaccountable
coldness which she had often observed at Norland in their mutual
behaviour. On Edward's side, more particularly, there was a deficiency
of all that a lover ought to look and say on such an occasion. He was
confused, seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure in seeing them, looked
neither rapturous nor gay, said little but what was forced from him by
questions, and distinguished Elinor by no mark of affection. Marianne
saw and listened with increasing surprise. She began almost to feel a
dislike of Edward; and it ended, as every feeling must end with her,
by carrying back her thoughts to Willoughby, whose manners formed a
contrast sufficiently striking to those of his brother elect.

After a short silence which succeeded the first surprise and enquiries
of meeting, Marianne asked Edward if he came directly from London. No,
he had been in Devonshire a fortnight.

"A fortnight!" she repeated, surprised at his being so long in the
same county with Elinor without seeing her before.

He looked rather distressed as he added, that he had been staying with
some friends near Plymouth.

"Have you been lately in Sussex?" said Elinor.

"I was at Norland about a month ago."

"And how does dear, dear Norland look?" cried Marianne.

"Dear, dear Norland," said Elinor, "probably looks much as it always
does at this time of the year--the woods and walks thickly covered
with dead leaves."

"Oh," cried Marianne, "with what transporting sensation have I
formerly seen them fall! How have I delighted, as I walked, to see
them driven in showers about me by the wind! What feelings have they,
the season, the air altogether inspired! Now there is no one to regard
them. They are seen only as a nuisance, swept hastily off, and driven
as much as possible from the sight."

"It is not every one," said Elinor, "who has your passion for dead
leaves."

"No; my feelings are not often shared, not often understood. But
_sometimes_ they are." As she said this, she sunk into a reverie for a
few moments; but rousing herself again, "Now, Edward," said she,
calling his attention to the prospect, "here is Barton valley. Look up
to it, and be tranquil if you can. Look at those hills! Did you ever
see their equals? To the left is Barton park, amongst those woods and
plantations. You may see the end of the house. And there, beneath that
farthest hill, which rises with such grandeur, is our cottage."

"It is a beautiful country," he replied; "but these bottoms must be
dirty in winter."

"How can you think of dirt, with such objects before you?"

"Because," replied he, smiling, "among the rest of the objects before
me, I see a very dirty lane."

"How strange!" said Marianne to herself as she walked on.

"Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here? Are the Middletons pleasant
people?"

"No, not all," answered Marianne; "we could not be more unfortunately
situated."

"Marianne," cried her sister, "how can you say so? How can you be so
unjust? They are a very respectable family, Mr. Ferrars; and towards
us have behaved in the friendliest manner. Have you forgot, Marianne,
how many pleasant days we have owed to them?"

"No," said Marianne, in a low voice, "nor how many painful moments."

Elinor took no notice of this; and directing her attention to their
visitor, endeavoured to support something like discourse with him, by
talking of their present residence, its conveniences, &c. extorting
from him occasional questions and remarks. His coldness and reserve
mortified her severely; she was vexed and half angry; but resolving to
regulate her behaviour to him by the past rather than the present,
she avoided every appearance of resentment or displeasure, and treated
him as she thought he ought to be treated from the family connection.




CHAPTER XVII


Mrs. Dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing him; for his
coming to Barton was, in her opinion, of all things the most natural.
Her joy and expression of regard long outlived her wonder. He received
the kindest welcome from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve could not
stand against such a reception. They had begun to fail him before he
entered the house, and they were quite overcome by the captivating
manners of Mrs. Dashwood. Indeed a man could not very well be in love
with either of her daughters, without extending the passion to her;
and Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like
himself. His affections seemed to reanimate towards them all, and his
interest in their welfare again became perceptible. He was not in
spirits, however; he praised their house, admired its prospect, was
attentive, and kind; but still he was not in spirits. The whole family
perceived it, and Mrs. Dashwood, attributing it to some want of
liberality in his mother, sat down to table indignant against all
selfish parents.

"What are Mrs. Ferrars's views for you at present, Edward?" said she,
when dinner was over and they had drawn round the fire; "are you still
to be a great orator in spite of yourself?"

"No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I have no more talents
than inclination for a public life!"

"But how is your fame to be established? for famous you must be to
satisfy all your family; and with no inclination for expense, no
affection for strangers, no profession, and no assurance, you may find
it a difficult matter."

"I shall not attempt it. I have no wish to be distinguished; and have
every reason to hope I never shall. Thank Heaven! I cannot be forced
into genius and eloquence."

"You have no ambition, I well know. Your wishes are all moderate."

"As moderate as those of the rest of the world, I believe. I wish as
well as every body else to be perfectly happy; but, like every body
else it must be in my own way. Greatness will not make me so."

"Strange that it would!" cried Marianne. "What have wealth or grandeur
to do with happiness?"

"Grandeur has but little," said Elinor, "but wealth has much to do
with it."

"Elinor, for shame!" said Marianne, "money can only give happiness
where there is nothing else to give it. Beyond a competence, it can
afford no real satisfaction, as far as mere self is concerned."

"Perhaps," said Elinor, smiling, "we may come to the same point.
_Your_ competence and _my_ wealth are very much alike, I dare say; and
without them, as the world goes now, we shall both agree that every
kind of external comfort must be wanting. Your ideas are only more
noble than mine. Come, what is your competence?"

"About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year; not more than _that._"

Elinor laughed. "_Two_ thousand a year! _One_ is my wealth! I guessed
how it would end."

"And yet two thousand a-year is a very moderate income," said
Marianne. "A family cannot well be maintained on a smaller. I am sure
I am not extravagant in my demands. A proper establishment of
servants, a carriage, perhaps two, and hunters, cannot be supported on
less."

Elinor smiled again, to hear her sister describing so accurately their
future expenses at Combe Magna.

"Hunters!" repeated Edward; "but why must you have hunters? Every body
does not hunt."

Marianne coloured as she replied, "But most people do."

"I wish," said Margaret, striking out a novel thought, "that somebody
would give us all a large fortune a-piece!"

"Oh that they would!" cried Marianne, her eyes sparkling with
animation, and her cheeks glowing with the delight of such imaginary
happiness.

"We are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose," said Elinor, "in spite
of the insufficiency of wealth."

"Oh dear!" cried Margaret, "how happy I should be! I wonder what I
should do with it!"

Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point.

"I should be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself," said Mrs.
Dashwood, "if my children were all to be rich without my help."

"You must begin your improvements on this house," observed Elinor,
"and your difficulties will soon vanish."

"What magnificent orders would travel from this family to London,"
said Edward, "in such an event! What a happy day for booksellers,
music-sellers, and print-shops! You, Miss Dashwood, would give a
general commission for every new print of merit to be sent you--and as
for Marianne, I know her greatness of soul, there would not be music
enough in London to content her. And books!--Thomson, Cowper,
Scott--she would buy them all over and over again: she would buy up
every copy, I believe, to prevent their falling into unworthy hands;
and she would have every book that tells her how to admire an old
twisted tree. Should not you, Marianne? Forgive me, if I am very
saucy. But I was willing to show you that I had not forgot our old
disputes."

"I love to be reminded of the past, Edward--whether it be melancholy
or gay, I love to recall it--and you will never offend me by talking
of former times. You are very right in supposing how my money would be
spent; some of it, at least--my loose cash--would certainly be
employed in improving my collection of music and books."

"And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in annuities on the
authors or their heirs."

"No, Edward, I should have something else to do with it."

"Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that person who
wrote the ablest defence of your favourite maxim, that no one can ever
be in love more than once in their life--for your opinion on that
point is unchanged, I presume?"

"Undoubtedly. At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed. It is
not likely that I should now see or hear any thing to change them."

"Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you see," said Elinor, "she is not
at all altered."

"She is only grown a little more grave than she was."

"Nay, Edward," said Marianne, "you need not reproach me. You are not
very gay yourself."

"Why should you think so!" replied he, with a sigh. "But gaiety never
was a part of _my_ character."

"Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's," said Elinor; "I should
hardly call her a lively girl--she is very earnest, very eager in all
she does--sometimes talks a great deal and always with animation--but
she is not often really merry."

"I believe you are right," he replied, "and yet I have always set her
down as a lively girl."

"I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistakes," said
Elinor, "in a total misapprehension of character in some point or
other: fancying people so much more gay or grave, or ingenious or
stupid than they really are, and I can hardly tell why or in what the
deception originated. Sometimes one is guided by what they say of
themselves, and very frequently by what other people say of them,
without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge."

"But I thought it was right, Elinor," said Marianne, "to be guided
wholly by the opinion of other people. I thought our judgments were
given us merely to be subservient to those of neighbours. This has
always been your doctrine, I am sure."

"No, Marianne, never. My doctrine has never aimed at the subjection of
the understanding. All I have ever attempted to influence has been the
behaviour. You must not confound my meaning. I am guilty, I confess,
of having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in general with
greater attention; but when have I advised you to adopt their
sentiments or to conform to their judgment in serious matters?"

"You have not been able to bring your sister over to your plan of
general civility," said Edward to Elinor, "Do you gain no ground?"

"Quite the contrary," replied Elinor, looking expressively at
Marianne.

"My judgment," he returned, "is all on your side of the question; but
I am afraid my practice is much more on your sister's. I never wish to
offend, but I am so foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent, when I
am only kept back by my natural awkwardness. I have frequently thought
that I must have been intended by nature to be fond of low company, I
am so little at my ease among strangers of gentility!"

"Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattention of hers," said
Elinor.

"She knows her own worth too well for false shame," replied Edward.
"Shyness is only the effect of a sense of inferiority in some way or
other. If I could persuade myself that my manners were perfectly easy
and graceful, I should not be shy."

"But you would still be reserved," said Marianne, "and that is worse."

Edward started. "Reserved! Am I reserved, Marianne?"

"Yes, very."

"I do not understand you," replied he, colouring. "Reserved!--how, in
what manner? What am I to tell you? What can you suppose?"

Elinor looked surprised at his emotion; but trying to laugh off the
subject, she said to him, "Do not you know my sister well enough to
understand what she means? Do not you know she calls every one
reserved who does not talk as fast, and admire what she admires as
rapturously as herself?"

Edward made no answer. His gravity and thoughtfulness returned on him
in their fullest extent--and he sat for some time silent and dull.




CHAPTER XVIII


Elinor saw, with great uneasiness the low spirits of her friend. His
visit afforded her but a very partial satisfaction, while his own
enjoyment in it appeared so imperfect. It was evident that he was
unhappy; she wished it were equally evident that he still
distinguished her by the same affection which once she had felt no
doubt of inspiring; but hitherto the continuance of his preference
seemed very uncertain; and the reservedness of his manner towards her
contradicted one moment what a more animated look had intimated the
preceding one.

He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast-room the next morning
before the others were down; and Marianne, who was always eager to
promote their happiness as far as she could, soon left them to
themselves. But before she was half way upstairs she heard the parlour
door open, and, turning round, was astonished to see Edward himself
come out.

"I am going into the village to see my horses," said he, "as you are
not yet ready for breakfast; I shall be back again presently."

       *       *       *       *       *

Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of the surrounding
country; in his walk to the village, he had seen many parts of the
valley to advantage; and the village itself, in a much higher
situation than the cottage, afforded a general view of the whole,
which had exceedingly pleased him. This was a subject which ensured
Marianne's attention, and she was beginning to describe her own
admiration of these scenes, and to question him more minutely on the
objects that had particularly struck him, when Edward interrupted her
by saying, "You must not enquire too far, Marianne: remember I have no
knowledge in the picturesque, and I shall offend you by my ignorance
and want of taste if we come to particulars. I shall call hills steep,
which ought to be bold; surfaces strange and uncouth, which ought to
be irregular and rugged; and distant objects out of sight, which ought
only to be indistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere.
You must be satisfied with such admiration as I can honestly give. I
call it a very fine country,--the hills are steep, the woods seem full
of fine timber, and the valley looks comfortable and snug,--with rich
meadows and several neat farm houses scattered here and there. It
exactly answers my idea of a fine country, because it unites beauty
with utility--and I dare say it is a picturesque one too, because you
admire it; I can easily believe it to be full of rocks and
promontories, grey moss and brush wood, but these are all lost on me.
I know nothing of the picturesque."

"I am afraid it is but too true," said Marianne; "but why should you
boast of it?"

"I suspect," said Elinor, "that to avoid one kind of affectation,
Edward here falls into another. Because he believes many people
pretend to more admiration of the beauties of nature than they really
feel, and is disgusted with such pretensions, he affects greater
indifference and less discrimination in viewing them himself than he
possesses. He is fastidious and will have an affectation of his own."

"It is very true," said Marianne, "that admiration of landscape
scenery is become a mere jargon. Every body pretends to feel and tries
to describe with the taste and elegance of him who first defined what
picturesque beauty was. I detest jargon of every kind, and sometimes I
have kept my feelings to myself, because I could find no language to
describe them in but what was worn and hackneyed out of all sense and
meaning."

"I am convinced," said Edward, "that you really feel all the delight
in a fine prospect which you profess to feel. But, in return, your
sister must allow me to feel no more than I profess. I like a fine
prospect, but not on picturesque principles. I do not like crooked,
twisted, blasted trees. I admire them much more if they are tall,
straight, and flourishing. I do not like ruined, tattered cottages. I
am not fond of nettles or thistles, or heath blossoms. I have more
pleasure in a snug farm-house than a watch-tower,--and a troop of
tidy, happy villages please me better than the finest banditti in the
world."

Marianne looked with amazement at Edward, with compassion at her
sister. Elinor only laughed.

The subject was continued no farther; and Marianne remained
thoughtfully silent, till a new object suddenly engaged her attention.
She was sitting by Edward, and in taking his tea from Mrs. Dashwood,
his hand passed so directly before her, as to make a ring, with a
plait of hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of his fingers.

"I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward," she cried. "Is that
Fanny's hair? I remember her promising to give you some. But I should
have thought her hair had been darker."

Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really felt; but when she saw
how much she had pained Edward, her own vexation at her want of
thought could not be surpassed by his. He coloured very deeply, and
giving a momentary glance at Elinor, replied, "Yes; it is my sister's
hair. The setting always casts a different shade on it, you know."

Elinor had met his eye, and looked conscious likewise. That the hair
was her own, she instantaneously felt as well satisfied as Marianne;
the only difference in their conclusions was, that what Marianne
considered as a free gift from her sister, Elinor was conscious must
have been procured by some theft or contrivance unknown to herself.
She was not in a humour, however, to regard it as an affront, and
affecting to take no notice of what passed, by instantly talking of
something else, she internally resolved henceforward to catch every
opportunity of eyeing the hair and of satisfying herself, beyond all
doubt, that it was exactly the shade of her own.

Edward's embarrassment lasted some time, and it ended in an absence of
mind still more settled. He was particularly grave the whole morning.
Marianne severely censured herself for what she had said; but her own
forgiveness might have been more speedy, had she known how little
offence it had given her sister.

Before the middle of the day, they were visited by Sir John and Mrs.
Jennings, who, having heard of the arrival of a gentleman at the
cottage, came to take a survey of the guest. With the assistance of
his mother-in-law, Sir John was not long in discovering that the name
of Ferrars began with an F. and this prepared a future mine of
raillery against the devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness of
their acquaintance with Edward could have prevented from being
immediately sprung. But, as it was, she only learned, from some very
significant looks, how far their penetration, founded on Margaret's
instructions, extended.

Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without either inviting them to
dine at the park the next day, or to drink tea with them that evening.
On the present occasion, for the better entertainment of their
visitor, towards whose amusement he felt himself bound to contribute,
he wished to engage them for both.

"You _must_ drink tea with us to night," said he, "for we shall be
quite alone; and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with us, for we
shall be a large party."

Mrs. Jennings enforced the necessity. "And who knows but you may raise
a dance," said she. "And that will tempt _you_, Miss Marianne."

"A dance!" cried Marianne. "Impossible! Who is to dance?"

[Illustration: _Came to take a survey of the guest._]

"Who? why yourselves, and the Careys, and Whitakers to be sure.
What! you thought nobody could dance because a certain person that
shall be nameless is gone!"

"I wish with all my soul," cried Sir John, "that Willoughby were among
us again."

This, and Marianne's blushing, gave new suspicions to Edward. "And who
is Willoughby?" said he, in a low voice, to Miss Dashwood, by whom he
was sitting.

She gave him a brief reply. Marianne's countenance was more
communicative. Edward saw enough to comprehend, not only the meaning
of others, but such of Marianne's expressions as had puzzled him
before; and when their visitors left them, he went immediately round
her, and said, in a whisper, "I have been guessing. Shall I tell you
my guess?"

"What do you mean?"

"Shall I tell you."

"Certainly."

"Well then; I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunts."

Marianne was surprised and confused, yet she could not help smiling at
the quiet archness of his manner, and after a moment's silence, said--

"Oh, Edward! How can you?--But the time will come I hope--I am sure
you will like him."

"I do not doubt it," replied he, rather astonished at her earnestness
and warmth; for had he not imagined it to be a joke for the good of
her acquaintance in general, founded only on a something or a nothing
between Mr. Willoughby and herself, he would not have ventured to
mention it.




CHAPTER XIX


Edward remained a week at the cottage; he was earnestly pressed by
Mrs. Dashwood to stay longer; but, as if he were bent only on
self-mortification, he seemed resolved to be gone when his enjoyment
among his friends was at the height. His spirits, during the last two
or three days, though still very unequal, were greatly improved--he
grew more and more partial to the house and environs--never spoke of
going away without a sigh--declared his time to be wholly
disengaged--even doubted to what place he should go when he left
them--but still, go he must. Never had any week passed so quickly--he
could hardly believe it to be gone. He said so repeatedly; other
things he said too, which marked the turn of his feelings and gave the
lie to his actions. He had no pleasure at Norland; he detested being
in town; but either to Norland or London, he must go. He valued their
kindness beyond any thing, and his greatest happiness was in being
with them. Yet, he must leave them at the end of a week, in spite of
their wishes and his own, and without any restraint on his time.

Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of acting to his
mother's account; and it was happy for her that he had a mother whose
character was so imperfectly known to her, as to be the general excuse
for every thing strange on the part of her son. Disappointed, however,
and vexed as she was, and sometimes displeased with his uncertain
behaviour to herself, she was very well disposed on the whole to
regard his actions with all the candid allowances and generous
qualifications, which had been rather more painfully extorted from
her, for Willoughby's service, by her mother. His want of spirits, of
openness, and of consistency, were most usually attributed to his want
of independence, and his better knowledge of Mrs. Ferrars's
disposition and designs. The shortness of his visit, the steadiness of
his purpose in leaving them, originated in the same fettered
inclination, the same inevitable necessity of temporizing with his
mother. The old well-established grievance of duty against will,
parent against child, was the cause of all. She would have been glad
to know when these difficulties were to cease, this opposition was to
yield, when Mrs. Ferrars would be reformed, and her son be at liberty
to be happy. But from such vain wishes she was forced to turn for
comfort to the renewal of her confidence in Edward's affection, to the
remembrance of every mark of regard in look or word which fell from
him while at Barton, and above all to that flattering proof of it
which he constantly wore round his finger.

"I think, Edward," said Mrs. Dashwood, as they were at breakfast the
last morning, "you would be a happier man if you had any profession to
engage your time and give an interest to your plans and actions. Some
inconvenience to your friends, indeed, might result from it--you would
not be able to give them so much of your time. But (with a smile) you
would be materially benefited in one particular at least--you would
know where to go when you left them."

"I do assure you," he replied, "that I have long thought on this
point, as you think now. It has been, and is, and probably will always
be a heavy misfortune to me, that I have had no necessary business to
engage me, no profession to give me employment, or afford me any thing
like independence. But unfortunately my own nicety, and the nicety of
my friends, have made me what I am, an idle, helpless being. We never
could agree in our choice of a profession. I always preferred the
church, as I still do. But that was not smart enough for my family.
They recommended the army. That was a great deal too smart for me. The
law was allowed to be genteel enough; many young men, who had chambers
in the Temple, made a very good appearance in the first circles, and
drove about town in very knowing gigs. But I had no inclination for
the law, even in this less abstruse study of it, which my family
approved. As for the navy, it had fashion on its side, but I was too
old when the subject was first started to enter it; and, at length, as
there was no necessity for my having any profession at all, as I might
be as dashing and expensive without a red coat on my back as with one,
idleness was pronounced on the whole to be most advantageous and
honourable, and a young man of eighteen is not in general so earnestly
bent on being busy as to resist the solicitations of his friends to do
nothing. I was therefore entered at Oxford and have been properly idle
ever since."

"The consequence of which, I suppose, will be," said Mrs. Dashwood,
"since leisure has not promoted your own happiness, that your sons
will be brought up to as many pursuits, employments, professions, and
trades as Columella's."

"They will be brought up," said he, in a serious accent, "to be as
unlike myself as is possible. In feeling, in action, in condition, in
every thing."

"Come, come; this is all an effusion of immediate want of spirits,
Edward. You are in a melancholy humour, and fancy that any one unlike
yourself must be happy. But remember that the pain of parting from
friends will be felt by every body at times, whatever be their
education or state. Know your own happiness. You want nothing but
patience--or give it a more fascinating name, call it hope. Your
mother will secure to you, in time, that independence you are so
anxious for; it is her duty, and it will, it must ere long become her
happiness to prevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent.
How much may not a few months do?"

"I think," replied Edward, "that I may defy many months to produce any
good to me."

This desponding turn of mind, though it could not be communicated to
Mrs. Dashwood, gave additional pain to them all in the parting, which
shortly took place, and left an uncomfortable impression on Elinor's
feelings especially, which required some trouble and time to subdue.
But as it was her determination to subdue it, and to prevent herself
from appearing to suffer more than what all her family suffered on his
going away, she did not adopt the method so judiciously employed by
Marianne, on a similar occasion, to augment and fix her sorrow, by
seeking silence, solitude and idleness. Their means were as different
as their objects, and equally suited to the advancement of each.

Elinor sat down to her drawing-table as soon as he was out of the
house, busily employed herself the whole day, neither sought nor
avoided the mention of his name, appeared to interest herself almost
as much as ever in the general concerns of the family, and if, by this
conduct, she did not lessen her own grief, it was at least prevented
from unnecessary increase, and her mother and sisters were spared much
solicitude on her account.

Such behaviour as this, so exactly the reverse of her own, appeared no
more meritorious to Marianne, than her own had seemed faulty to her.
The business of self-command she settled very easily;--with strong
affections it was impossible, with calm ones it could have no merit.
That her sister's affections _were_ calm, she dared not deny, though
she blushed to acknowledge it; and of the strength of her own, she
gave a very striking proof, by still loving and respecting that
sister, in spite of this mortifying conviction.

Without shutting herself up from her family, or leaving the house in
determined solitude to avoid them, or lying awake the whole night to
indulge meditation, Elinor found every day afforded her leisure enough
to think of Edward, and of Edward's behaviour, in every possible
variety which the different state of her spirits at different times
could produce,--with tenderness, pity, approbation, censure, and
doubt. There were moments in abundance, when, if not by the absence of
her mother and sisters, at least by the nature of their employments,
conversation was forbidden among them, and every effect of solitude
was produced. Her mind was inevitably at liberty; her thoughts could
not be chained elsewhere; and the past and the future, on a subject so
interesting, must be before her, must force her attention, and engross
her memory, her reflection, and her fancy.

From a reverie of this kind, as she sat at her drawing-table, she was
roused one morning, soon after Edward's leaving them, by the arrival
of company. She happened to be quite alone. The closing of the little
gate, at the entrance of the green court in front of the house, drew
her eyes to the window, and she saw a large party walking up to the
door. Amongst them were Sir John and Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings,
but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who were quite
unknown to her. She was sitting near the window, and as soon as Sir
John perceived her, he left the rest of the party to the ceremony of
knocking at the door, and stepping across the turf, obliged her to
open the casement to speak to him, though the space was so short
between the door and the window, as to make it hardly possible to
speak at one without being heard at the other.

"Well," said he, "we have brought you some strangers. How do you like
them?"

"Hush! they will hear you."

"Never mind if they do. It is only the Palmers. Charlotte is very
pretty, I can tell you. You may see her if you look this way."

As Elinor was certain of seeing her in a couple of minutes, without
taking that liberty, she begged to be excused.

"Where is Marianne? Has she run away because we are come? I see her
instrument is open."

"She is walking, I believe."

They were now joined by Mrs. Jennings, who had not patience enough to
wait till the door was opened before she told _her_ story. She came
hallooing to the window, "How do you do, my dear? How does Mrs.
Dashwood do? And where are your sisters? What! all alone! you will be
glad of a little company to sit with you. I have brought my other son
and daughter to see you. Only think of their coming so suddenly! I
thought I heard a carriage last night, while we were drinking our tea,
but it never entered my head that it could be them. I thought of
nothing but whether it might not be Colonel Brandon come back again;
so I said to Sir John, I do think I hear a carriage; perhaps it is
Colonel Brandon come back again--"

Elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle of her story, to
receive the rest of the party; Lady Middleton introduced the two
strangers; Mrs. Dashwood and Margaret came down stairs at the same
time, and they all sat down to look at one another, while Mrs.
Jennings continued her story as she walked through the passage into
the parlour, attended by Sir John.

Mrs. Palmer was several years younger than Lady Middleton, and totally
unlike her in every respect. She was short and plump, had a very
pretty face, and the finest expression of good humour in it that could
possibly be. Her manners were by no means so elegant as her sister's,
but they were much more prepossessing. She came in with a smile,
smiled all the time of her visit, except when she laughed, and smiled
when she went away. Her husband was a grave looking young man of five
or six and twenty, with an air of more fashion and sense than his
wife, but of less willingness to please or be pleased. He entered the
room with a look of self-consequence, slightly bowed to the ladies,
without speaking a word, and, after briefly surveying them and their
apartments, took up a newspaper from the table, and continued to read
it as long as he stayed.

Mrs. Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongly endowed by nature with
a turn for being uniformly civil and happy, was hardly seated before
her admiration of the parlour and every thing in it burst forth.

"Well! what a delightful room this is! I never saw anything so
charming! Only think, Mamma, how it is improved since I was here last!
I always thought it such a sweet place, ma'am! (turning to Mrs.
Dashwood) but you have made it so charming! Only look, sister, how
delightful every thing is! How I should like such a house for myself!
Should not you, Mr. Palmer?"

Mr. Palmer made her no answer, and did not even raise his eyes from
the newspaper.

"Mr. Palmer does not hear me," said she, laughing; "he never does
sometimes. It is so ridiculous!"

This was quite a new idea to Mrs. Dashwood; she had never been used to
find wit in the inattention of any one, and could not help looking
with surprise at them both.

Mrs. Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as she could, and
continued her account of their surprise, the evening before, on seeing
their friends, without ceasing till every thing was told. Mrs. Palmer
laughed heartily at the recollection of their astonishment, and every
body agreed, two or three times over, that it had been quite an
agreeable surprise.

"You may believe how glad we all were to see them," added Mrs.
Jennings, leaning forward towards Elinor, and speaking in a low voice
as if she meant to be heard by no one else, though they were seated on
different sides of the room; "but, however, I can't help wishing they
had not travelled quite so fast, nor made such a long journey of it,
for they came all round by London upon account of some business, for
you know (nodding significantly and pointing to her daughter) it was
wrong in her situation. I wanted her to stay at home and rest this
morning, but she would come with us; she longed so much to see you
all!"

Mrs. Palmer laughed, and said it would not do her any harm.

"She expects to be confined in February," continued Mrs. Jennings.

Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a conversation, and
therefore exerted herself to ask Mr. Palmer if there was any news in
the paper.

"No, none at all," he replied, and read on.

"Here comes Marianne," cried Sir John. "Now, Palmer, you shall see a
monstrous pretty girl."

He immediately went into the passage, opened the front door, and
ushered her in himself. Mrs. Jennings asked her, as soon as she
appeared, if she had not been to Allenham; and Mrs. Palmer laughed so
heartily at the question, as to show she understood it. Mr. Palmer
looked up on her entering the room, stared at her some minutes, and
then returned to his newspaper. Mrs. Palmer's eye was now caught by
the drawings which hung round the room. She got up to examine them.

[Illustration: "_I declare they are quite charming_."]

"Oh! dear, how beautiful these are! Well! how delightful! Do but look,
mama, how sweet! I declare they are quite charming; I could look at
them for ever." And then sitting down again, she very soon forgot that
there were any such things in the room.

When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr. Palmer rose also, laid down
the newspaper, stretched himself and looked at them all around.

"My love, have you been asleep?" said his wife, laughing.

He made her no answer; and only observed, after again examining the
room, that it was very low pitched, and that the ceiling was crooked.
He then made his bow, and departed with the rest.

Sir John had been very urgent with them all to spend the next day at
the park. Mrs. Dashwood, who did not choose to dine with them oftener
than they dined at the cottage, absolutely refused on her own account;
her daughters might do as they pleased. But they had no curiosity to
see how Mr. and Mrs. Palmer ate their dinner, and no expectation of
pleasure from them in any other way. They attempted, therefore,
likewise, to excuse themselves; the weather was uncertain, and not
likely to be good. But Sir John would not be satisfied--the carriage
should be sent for them and they must come. Lady Middleton too, though
she did not press their mother, pressed them. Mrs. Jennings and Mrs.
Palmer joined their entreaties, all seemed equally anxious to avoid a
family party; and the young ladies were obliged to yield.

"Why should they ask us?" said Marianne, as soon as they were gone.
"The rent of this cottage is said to be low; but we have it on very
hard terms, if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying
either with them, or with us."

"They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now," said Elinor, "by
these frequent invitations, than by those which we received from them
a few weeks ago. The alteration is not in them, if their parties are
grown tedious and dull. We must look for the change elsewhere."




CHAPTER XX


As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the park the next
day, at one door, Mrs. Palmer came running in at the other, looking as
good humoured and merry as before. She took them all most
affectionately by the hand, and expressed great delight in seeing them
again.

"I am so glad to see you!" said she, seating herself between Elinor
and Marianne, "for it is so bad a day I was afraid you might not come,
which would be a shocking thing, as we go away again tomorrow. We must
go, for the Westons come to us next week you know. It was quite a
sudden thing our coming at all, and I knew nothing of it till the
carriage was coming to the door, and then Mr. Palmer asked me if I
would go with him to Barton. He is so droll! He never tells me any
thing! I am so sorry we cannot stay longer; however we shall meet
again in town very soon, I hope."

They were obliged to put an end to such an expectation.

"Not go to town!" cried Mrs. Palmer, with a laugh, "I shall be quite
disappointed if you do not. I could get the nicest house in world for
you, next door to ours, in Hanover-square. You must come, indeed. I am
sure I shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I am
confined, if Mrs. Dashwood should not like to go into public."

They thanked her; but were obliged to resist all her entreaties.

"Oh, my love," cried Mrs. Palmer to her husband, who just then entered
the room--"you must help me to persuade the Miss Dashwoods to go to
town this winter."

Her love made no answer; and after slightly bowing to the ladies,
began complaining of the weather.

"How horrid all this is!" said he. "Such weather makes every thing and
every body disgusting. Dullness is as much produced within doors as
without, by rain. It makes one detest all one's acquaintance. What the
devil does Sir John mean by not having a billiard room in his house?
How few people know what comfort is! Sir John is as stupid as the
weather."

The rest of the company soon dropt in.

"I am afraid, Miss Marianne," said Sir John, "you have not been able
to take your usual walk to Allenham today."

Marianne looked very grave and said nothing.

"Oh, don't be so sly before us," said Mrs. Palmer; "for we know all
about it, I assure you; and I admire your taste very much, for I think
he is extremely handsome. We do not live a great way from him in the
country, you know. Not above ten miles, I dare say."

"Much nearer thirty," said her husband.

"Ah, well! there is not much difference. I never was at his house; but
they say it is a sweet pretty place."

"As vile a spot as I ever saw in my life," said Mr. Palmer.

Marianne remained perfectly silent, though her countenance betrayed
her interest in what was said.

"Is it very ugly?" continued Mrs. Palmer--"then it must be some other
place that is so pretty I suppose."

When they were seated in the dining room, Sir John observed with
regret that they were only eight all together.

"My dear," said he to his lady, "it is very provoking that we should
be so few. Why did not you ask the Gilberts to come to us today?"

"Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you spoke to me about it before,
that it could not be done? They dined with us last."

"You and I, Sir John," said Mrs. Jennings, "should not stand upon such
ceremony."

"Then you would be very ill-bred," cried Mr. Palmer.

"My love you contradict every body," said his wife with her usual
laugh. "Do you know that you are quite rude?"

"I did not know I contradicted any body in calling your mother
ill-bred."

"Ay, you may abuse me as you please," said the good-natured old lady,
"you have taken Charlotte off my hands, and cannot give her back
again. So there I have the whip hand of you."

Charlotte laughed heartily to think that her husband could not get rid
of her; and exultingly said, she did not care how cross he was to her,
as they must live together. It was impossible for any one to be more
thoroughly good-natured, or more determined to be happy than Mrs.
Palmer. The studied indifference, insolence, and discontent of her
husband gave her no pain; and when he scolded or abused her, she was
highly diverted.

"Mr. Palmer is so droll!" said she, in a whisper, to Elinor. "He is
always out of humour."

Elinor was not inclined, after a little observation, to give him
credit for being so genuinely and unaffectedly ill-natured or ill-bred
as he wished to appear. His temper might perhaps be a little soured by
finding, like many others of his sex, that through some unaccountable
bias in favour of beauty, he was the husband of a very silly
woman,--but she knew that this kind of blunder was too common for any
sensible man to be lastingly hurt by it. It was rather a wish of
distinction, she believed, which produced his contemptuous treatment
of every body, and his general abuse of every thing before him. It was
the desire of appearing superior to other people. The motive was too
common to be wondered at; but the means, however they might succeed by
establishing his superiority in ill-breeding, were not likely to
attach any one to him except his wife.

"Oh, my dear Miss Dashwood," said Mrs. Palmer soon afterwards, "I have
got such a favour to ask of you and your sister. Will you come and
spend some time at Cleveland this Christmas? Now, pray do,--and come
while the Westons are with us. You cannot think how happy I shall be!
It will be quite delightful!--My love," applying to her husband,
"don't you long to have the Miss Dashwoods come to Cleveland?"

"Certainly," he replied, with a sneer--"I came into Devonshire with no
other view."

"There now,"--said his lady, "you see Mr. Palmer expects you; so you
cannot refuse to come."

They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invitation.

"But indeed you must and shall come. I am sure you will like it of all
things. The Westons will be with us, and it will be quite delightful.
You cannot think what a sweet place Cleveland is; and we are so gay
now, for Mr. Palmer is always going about the country canvassing
against the election; and so many people came to dine with us that I
never saw before, it is quite charming! But, poor fellow! it is very
fatiguing to him! for he is forced to make every body like him."

Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as she assented to the
hardship of such an obligation.

"How charming it will be," said Charlotte, "when he is in
Parliament!--won't it? How I shall laugh! It will be so ridiculous to
see all his letters directed to him with an M.P. But do you know, he
says, he will never frank for me? He declares he won't. Don't you, Mr.
Palmer?"

Mr. Palmer took no notice of her.

"He cannot bear writing, you know," she continued; "he says it is
quite shocking."

"No," said he, "I never said any thing so irrational. Don't palm all
your abuses of languages upon me."

"There now; you see how droll he is. This is always the way with him!
Sometimes he won't speak to me for half a day together, and then he
comes out with something so droll--all about any thing in the world."

She surprised Elinor very much as they returned into the drawing-room,
by asking her whether she did not like Mr. Palmer excessively.

"Certainly," said Elinor; "he seems very agreeable."

"Well--I am so glad you do. I thought you would, he is so pleasant;
and Mr. Palmer is excessively pleased with you and your sisters I can
tell you, and you can't think how disappointed he will be if you don't
come to Cleveland. I can't imagine why you should object to it."

Elinor was again obliged to decline her invitation; and by changing
the subject, put a stop to her entreaties. She thought it probable
that as they lived in the same county, Mrs. Palmer might be able to
give some more particular account of Willoughby's general character,
than could be gathered from the Middletons' partial acquaintance with
him; and she was eager to gain from any one, such a confirmation of
his merits as might remove the possibility of fear from Marianne. She
began by inquiring if they saw much of Mr. Willoughby at Cleveland,
and whether they were intimately acquainted with him.

"Oh dear, yes; I know him extremely well," replied Mrs. Palmer;--"Not
that I ever spoke to him, indeed; but I have seen him for ever in
town. Somehow or other I never happened to be staying at Barton while
he was at Allenham. Mama saw him here once before, but I was with my
uncle at Weymouth. However, I dare say we should have seen a great
deal of him in Somersetshire, if it had not happened very unluckily
that we should never have been in the country together. He is very
little at Combe, I believe; but if he were ever so much there, I do
not think Mr. Palmer would visit him, for he is in the opposition, you
know, and besides it is such a way off. I know why you inquire about
him, very well; your sister is to marry him. I am monstrous glad of
it, for then I shall have her for a neighbour you know."

"Upon my word," replied Elinor, "you know much more of the matter than
I do, if you have any reason to expect such a match."

"Don't pretend to deny it, because you know it is what every body
talks of. I assure you I heard of it in my way through town."

"My dear Mrs. Palmer!"

"Upon my honour I did. I met Colonel Brandon Monday morning in
Bond-street, just before we left town, and he told me of it directly."

"You surprise me very much. Colonel Brandon tell you of it! Surely you
must be mistaken. To give such intelligence to a person who could not
be interested in it, even if it were true, is not what I should expect
Colonel Brandon to do."

"But I do assure you it was so, for all that, and I will tell you how
it happened. When we met him, he turned back and walked with us; and
so we began talking of my brother and sister, and one thing and
another, and I said to him, 'So, Colonel, there is a new family come
to Barton cottage, I hear, and mama sends me word they are very
pretty, and that one of them is going to be married to Mr. Willoughby
of Combe Magna. Is it true, pray? for of course you must know, as you
have been in Devonshire so lately.'"

"And what did the Colonel say?"

"Oh--he did not say much; but he looked as if he knew it to be true,
so from that moment I set it down as certain. It will be quite
delightful, I declare! When is it to take place?"

"Mr. Brandon was very well I hope?"

"Oh! yes, quite well; and so full of your praises, he did nothing but
say fine things of you."

"I am flattered by his commendation. He seems an excellent man; and I
think him uncommonly pleasing."

"So do I. He is such a charming man, that it is quite a pity he should
be so grave and so dull. Mamma says _he_ was in love with your sister
too. I assure you it was a great compliment if he was, for he hardly
ever falls in love with any body."

"Is Mr. Willoughby much known in your part of Somersetshire?" said
Elinor.

"Oh! yes, extremely well; that is, I do not believe many people are
acquainted with him, because Combe Magna is so far off; but they all
think him extremely agreeable I assure you. Nobody is more liked than
Mr. Willoughby wherever he goes, and so you may tell your sister. She
is a monstrous lucky girl to get him, upon my honour; not but that he
is much more lucky in getting her, because she is so very handsome and
agreeable, that nothing can be good enough for her. However, I don't
think her hardly at all handsomer than you, I assure you; for I think
you both excessively pretty, and so does Mr. Palmer too I am sure,
though we could not get him to own it last night."

Mrs. Palmer's information respecting Willoughby was not very material;
but any testimony in his favour, however small, was pleasing to her.

"I am so glad we are got acquainted at last," continued Charlotte.
"And now I hope we shall always be great friends. You can't think how
much I longed to see you! It is so delightful that you should live at
the cottage! Nothing can be like it, to be sure! And I am so glad your
sister is going to be well married! I hope you will be a great deal at
Combe Magna. It is a sweet place, by all accounts."

"You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon, have not you?"

"Yes, a great while; ever since my sister married. He was a particular
friend of Sir John's. I believe," she added in a low voice, "he would
have been very glad to have had me, if he could. Sir John and Lady
Middleton wished it very much. But mama did not think the match good
enough for me, otherwise Sir John would have mentioned it to the
Colonel, and we should have been married immediately."

"Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's proposal to your mother
before it was made? Had he never owned his affection to yourself?"

"Oh, no; but if mama had not objected to it, I dare say he would have
liked it of all things. He had not seen me then above twice, for it
was before I left school. However, I am much happier as I am. Mr.
Palmer is the kind of man I like."




CHAPTER XXI


The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day, and the two families
at Barton were again left to entertain each other. But this did not
last long; Elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of her head,
had hardly done wondering at Charlotte's being so happy without a
cause, at Mr. Palmer's acting so simply, with good abilities, and at
the strange unsuitableness which often existed between husband and
wife, before Sir John's and Mrs. Jennings's active zeal in the cause
of society, procured her some other new acquaintance to see and
observe.

In a morning's excursion to Exeter, they had met with two young
ladies, whom Mrs. Jennings had the satisfaction of discovering to be
her relations, and this was enough for Sir John to invite them
directly to the park, as soon as their present engagements at Exeter
were over. Their engagements at Exeter instantly gave way before such
an invitation, and Lady Middleton was thrown into no little alarm on
the return of Sir John, by hearing that she was very soon to receive a
visit from two girls whom she had never seen in her life, and of whose
elegance--whose tolerable gentility even--she could have no proof; for
the assurances of her husband and mother on that subject went for
nothing at all. Their being her relations too made it so much the
worse; and Mrs. Jennings's attempts at consolation were therefore
unfortunately founded, when she advised her daughter not to care about
their being so fashionable; because they were all cousins and must put
up with one another. As it was impossible, however, now to prevent
their coming, Lady Middleton resigned herself to the idea of it, with
all the philosophy of a well-bred woman, contenting herself with
merely giving her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject five or
six times every day.

The young ladies arrived: their appearance was by no means ungenteel
or unfashionable. Their dress was very smart, their manners very
civil, they were delighted with the house, and in raptures with the
furniture, and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children that
Lady Middleton's good opinion was engaged in their favour before they
had been an hour at the Park. She declared them to be very agreeable
girls indeed, which for her ladyship was enthusiastic admiration. Sir
John's confidence in his own judgment rose with this animated praise,
and he set off directly for the cottage to tell the Miss Dashwoods of
the Miss Steeles' arrival, and to assure them of their being the
sweetest girls in the world. From such commendation as this, however,
there was not much to be learned; Elinor well knew that the sweetest
girls in the world were to be met with in every part of England, under
every possible variation of form, face, temper and understanding. Sir
John wanted the whole family to walk to the Park directly and look at
his guests. Benevolent, philanthropic man! It was painful to him even
to keep a third cousin to himself.

"Do come now," said he--"pray come--you must come--I declare you shall
come--You can't think how you will like them. Lucy is monstrous
pretty, and so good humoured and agreeable! The children are all
hanging about her already, as if she was an old acquaintance. And they
both long to see you of all things, for they have heard at Exeter that
you are the most beautiful creatures in the world; and I have told
them it is all very true, and a great deal more. You will be delighted
with them I am sure. They have brought the whole coach full of
playthings for the children. How can you be so cross as not to come?
Why they are your cousins, you know, after a fashion. _You_ are my
cousins, and they are my wife's, so you must be related."

But Sir John could not prevail. He could only obtain a promise of
their calling at the Park within a day or two, and then left them in
amazement at their indifference, to walk home and boast anew of their
attractions to the Miss Steeles, as he had been already boasting of
the Miss Steeles to them.

When their promised visit to the Park and consequent introduction to
these young ladies took place, they found in the appearance of the
eldest, who was nearly thirty, with a very plain and not a sensible
face, nothing to admire; but in the other, who was not more than two
or three and twenty, they acknowledged considerable beauty; her
features were pretty, and she had a sharp quick eye, and a smartness
of air, which though it did not give actual elegance or grace, gave
distinction to her person. Their manners were particularly civil, and
Elinor soon allowed them credit for some kind of sense, when she saw
with what constant and judicious attention they were making themselves
agreeable to Lady Middleton. With her children they were in continual
raptures, extolling their beauty, courting their notice, and humouring
their whims; and such of their time as could be spared from the
importunate demands which this politeness made on it, was spent in
admiration of whatever her ladyship was doing, if she happened to be
doing any thing, or in taking patterns of some elegant new dress, in
which her appearance the day before had thrown them into unceasing
delight. Fortunately for those who pay their court through such
foibles, a fond mother, though, in pursuit of praise for her children,
the most rapacious of human beings, is likewise the most credulous;
her demands are exorbitant; but she will swallow any thing; and the
excessive affection and endurance of the Miss Steeles towards her
offspring were viewed therefore by Lady Middleton without the smallest
surprise or distrust. She saw with maternal complacency all the
impertinent encroachments and mischievous tricks to which her cousins
submitted. She saw their sashes untied, their hair pulled about their
ears, their work-bags searched, and their knives and scissors stolen
away, and felt no doubt of its being a reciprocal enjoyment. It
suggested no other surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit
so composedly by, without claiming a share in what was passing.

"John is in such spirits today!" said she, on his taking Miss Steele's
pocket handkerchief, and throwing it out of window--"He is full of
monkey tricks."

And soon afterwards, on the second boy's violently pinching one of the
same lady's fingers, she fondly observed, "How playful William is!"

[Illustration: _Mischievous tricks._]

"And here is my sweet little Annamaria," she added, tenderly caressing
a little girl of three years old, who had not made a noise for the
last two minutes; "And she is always so gentle and quiet--Never was
there such a quiet little thing!"

But unfortunately in bestowing these embraces, a pin in her ladyship's
head dress slightly scratching the child's neck, produced from this
pattern of gentleness such violent screams, as could hardly be outdone
by any creature professedly noisy. The mother's consternation was
excessive; but it could not surpass the alarm of the Miss Steeles, and
every thing was done by all three, in so critical an emergency, which
affection could suggest as likely to assuage the agonies of the little
sufferer. She was seated in her mother's lap, covered with kisses, her
wound bathed with lavender-water, by one of the Miss Steeles, who was
on her knees to attend her, and her mouth stuffed with sugar plums by
the other. With such a reward for her tears, the child was too wise to
cease crying. She still screamed and sobbed lustily, kicked her two
brothers for offering to touch her, and all their united soothings
were ineffectual till Lady Middleton luckily remembering that in a
scene of similar distress last week, some apricot marmalade had been
successfully applied for a bruised temple, the same remedy was eagerly
proposed for this unfortunate scratch, and a slight intermission of
screams in the young lady on hearing it, gave them reason to hope that
it would not be rejected. She was carried out of the room therefore in
her mother's arms, in quest of this medicine, and as the two boys
chose to follow, though earnestly entreated by their mother to stay
behind, the four young ladies were left in a quietness which the room
had not known for many hours.

"Poor little creatures!" said Miss Steele, as soon as they were gone.
"It might have been a very sad accident."

"Yet I hardly know how," cried Marianne, "unless it had been under
totally different circumstances. But this is the usual way of
heightening alarm, where there is nothing to be alarmed at in
reality."
